

V. Narain

have sought to explore the relationships between the technological, hydrological
and social dimensions of water management.1
The genesis of new paradigms influencing water resource policy and governance
is a process in which both global and local actors have had a role to play (Narain
et al. 2014; Narayanan et al. 2014). Donors and funders have played a critical role
in influencing the nature and direction of what are popularly called “water reforms”.
They have played a key role in propagating new discourses around water resource
management. A case in point is the neo-liberal discourse propagated by the World
Bank and other international agencies that paved way for a greater role for the free
market in the allocation of water resources. The neo-liberal discourse was founded
on the narrative of the weak and inefficient state, and the free market was seen as a
natural and obvious alternative. While the state was seen as playing a key role in the
allocation and management of water resources in the country till the late 1980s, the
neo-liberal discourse paved the way for a greater role for the free market in the
period after that. Operationally, this created space for new actors in the governance
of water resources. This took the form of outright privatization, for instance, and
spawned debates regarding its equity and justice dimensions (Urs and Whittel
2009). Autonomous forms of water markets have nevertheless functioned for several decades in the form of water tankers meeting the demand – supply gap for
drinking water in cities, as well as groundwater markets meeting the needs of smallholder irrigators. Both these forms of markets have, however, functioned outside
any regulatory environment, raising questions about their equity, efficiency and sustainability implications (Shah 1993; Dubaash 2002; Prakash 2005).
Along the continuum of state and market based allocation of water, a distinct
space was created for user or community based organizations for water management. This emphasis stemmed from a realization that communities were capable of
crafting their own rules for resource appropriation and management (Ostrom 1990,
1992). The positive evidence generated by farmer-managed irrigation systems in
India provided the basis for the underlying narratives for policies for decentralization in irrigation management. This narrative was propagated by donors and funders;
NGOs played their part in mobilising communities for irrigation management,
while lobbying with state governments to put in place appropriate policies (Narain
2003; Shashidharan 2000). Thus, the social engineering paradigm took shape, based
on the premise that institutions for collective management of water could be
“designed” or “engineered”, often along the lines of models or prototypes.2
In the late 1990s, this culminated in serious efforts at establishing water users
associations in irrigation management. The IndianPIM, Indian Network for
Participatory Irrigation Management, gave a call for speedy upscaling and replication of water users associations, as if it were a ‘one size fits all’ panacea for the ills
of the irrigation sector (Narain 2003). However, by the turn of the millennium, the
euphoria surrounding water users’ associations seemed to have considerably died
1

As an example, see Roth and Vincent (2013). See also Narain (2003), Prakash (2005), Mehta
(2005) and Dubaash (2002).
2
For a discussion on the importance of models for irrigation management transfer in debates on
irrigation reform, see Mollinga (2001). See also Parthasarathy (1998).

 
1

Introduction: Towards a Discursive Analysis of Indian Water Policy

3

down. Several factors were found to limit the effectiveness and success of water
users’ associations,, including limited attention to the implications of design or the
technology of irrigation systems in irrigation management transfer programmes, the
perpetuation of unequal power structures in the functioning of water users’ associations, poor consideration of the implications of WUA formation for water rights and
entitlements, the influence of local politics, and resistance within the bureaucracy to
support WUA formation (Narain 2003, 2004, 2008; Mollinga 2001; Jairath 1999;
Parthasarathy 1998).
In more recent years, several new subjects have come up surrounding the question of appropriate forms of water governance. These concern the role of regulatory
authorities as well as the functioning of public-private partnerships. Public-Private
partnerships are seen as a way of augmenting state resources, providing new technology and expertise as well as a way of overcoming the slack and inefficiency of
state enterprises. Public-private partnerships provide a legitimate way of involving
private enterprise, especially where outright privatization may not be politically
expedient. Critics, however, argue that public-private partnerships provide a form of
disguised privatization, or ‘privatization by the back-door’.
While there have been experiments both with public-private partnerships as well
as with privatization, the latter has met with more explicit resistance. This resistance
stems from the inability of the market to deliver a good as basic as water to those
who are unable to pay for it (Urs and Whittel 2009; Kulkarni 2014). Water problems
are rightly clubbed as “wicked problems”, denying clear-cut solutions or outcomes
(Gyawali 2014; Mosse 2009). This ‘wicked nature’ stems from the multi-dimensional
nature of the resource – from its possessing economic, social, cultural and political
values all at the same time.
While there has been a recent nod of approval from the judiciary on the subject
of the inter-linking of India’s rivers, this proposal presents a very good example of
polarised views on what constitutes the “right way” to solve India’s water problems.
The proposal for inter-linking of rivers has been founded on the narrative that India’s
water problems are predominantly of a physical nature and that solutions lie in ameliorating the imbalance in the availability of water, transferring water from surplus
to deficit basins. Water scholars have nevertheless challenged this narrative, asserting that the scarcity of water is a social construction as much as a physical one
(Mehta 2005). In the context of the inter-linking of rivers, little attention has nevertheless been paid to the rights and equity dimensions of the water transfers envisaged; debates on the justice dimensions have stayed confined to issues of relocation
and rehabilitation of displaced communities.
While IWRM, or Integrated Water Resource Management, has been the dominant mantra or buzzword in water management in recent decades, there remains a
critical issue of deconstructing its components and depoliticising the discourse,
while placing it in the Indian context to study its applicability and relevance. On
many other subjects, such as water rights reform, the level of discourse has remained
somewhat static. While the rationale for a property rights structure has been built on
grounds of equity, efficiency and sustainability, questions are still raised on its practicability. New research – including that presented in this book, however, suggests
that recent technological interventions may lower the transaction costs of adminis-

 
4

V. Narain

tering a water rights structure, even in Indian conditions where the large number and
geographical spread of water users is known to raise the transaction costs of administering such a system (Kumar et al. 2011).
The debate on the efficacy of different approaches to regulate groundwater has
continued in the Indian water governance literature. Groundwater irrigation received
a big spurt after the green revolution boom of the 1960s. The high-yielding varieties
of crops that the green revolution technology demanded required timely application
of water. This could not be provided by canal irrigation systems, that operate under
state operated irrigation schedules. Besides, canal irrigation systems in India are
protective irrigation systems, aiming to supply water thinly over a large number of
farmers and a large geographical area (Jurriens et al. 1996). They are designed to
meet a fraction of the irrigator’s crop water requirements, as against the goal of
productive irrigation. This created a stress on groundwater irrigation, that irrigators
use for the greater control that it provides on water availability.
However, indiscriminate exploitation of groundwater has created a problem of
steadily falling water tables, especially in the context of India’s agriculturally
important states. This has implications for sustainability of the green revolution
itself, but also has wider equity implications, as falling water tables place the
resource out of the reach of the smaller and marginal farmers. There has been an
on-going debate among scholars of water governance in India on the appropriate
ways of arresting the problem of groundwater depletion, and this debate shall likely
continue, even as climate change presents additional stresses on the resource.3 Other
important subjects of debate in the realm of Indian water policy over recent years
have been the limited effectiveness of policies for combating water pollution, the
persistence of a gap between the rhetoric and practice of gender mainstreaming and
limited attention to issues of equity and social justice in water planning.

1.1

Changing Paradigms and Debates in Indian Water Policy

This book seeks to present the current debates on these and other subjects shaping
the governance of water resources in the country. It takes stock of new policy developments in India’s water sector, what the experience with their implementation has
been, and where important weaknesses still lie. From this perspective, this books
seeks to contribute to the growing body of scholarship around water resources policy in India in particular, and water Resources policy in South Asia, more generally.4
Authors make an effort to present a road-map for the future, while discussing the
potential of alternative approaches to addressing the emerging challenges of India’s
water sector.

3

See, for instance, Shah (2013).
As recent contributions to this body of work, see Narain et al. (2014); Prakash et al. (2013);
Narayanan et al. (2014). See also Ballabh (2008) and Lahiri-Dutt and Wasson (2008).
4

 
1

Introduction: Towards a Discursive Analysis of Indian Water Policy

1.1.1

5

The Challenges of Groundwater Management, Water
Rights Reform and Other Regulatory Approaches

As noted earlier, groundwater has assumed an increasingly important role in India’s
irrigation and agricultural development. It provides 50 % of irrigation in India and
accounts for about a third of total food crop production in the country (Shah 2009).
With growing dependence on the resource, however, groundwater has become at
once a critical and threatened resource, with ‘competitive deepening’ emerging as a
major issue in select regions, and climate change acting as a further multiplier (Shah
2009, 2013). There has been a debate spanning over four decades now in the country on appropriate approaches to regulate groundwater extraction. Authors have
debated the potency of various measures, ranging from spacing and licensing norms,
credit and electricity restrictions to the institution of a property rights structure
(Shah 1993; Narain 1998, 2000; Saleth 1996; Kumar et al. 2011). A case has been
made for enabling and participatory approaches to address this problem, as against
technocratic and engineering-focused control –based approaches (Moench 1994).
Reviewing the current challenges in groundwater management in India and the
potential of alternative approaches to tackle them, Nitin Bassi (Chap. 3) advocates
the enforcement of private and tradable water rights in groundwater as a means to
bring about increase in farm outputs, while reducing aggregate demand for water.
This, he suggests needs to be complemented by a pro rata pricing of electricity in
the farm sector, and an improvement in the quality and reliability of supplied power.
Maria Saleth (Chap. 9) looks more closely at the subject of a property rights
structure for water. While the case for a property rights structure has been made in
the Indian water governance and policy debate for several decades, Saleth provides
support in favour of the administrative and technical feasibility of instituting such a
system, much on lines of the arguments made by Nitin Bassi in this book. He cites
evidence in the form of different kinds of water rights systems functioning in the
country, while emphasizing the absolute necessity of formalizing such a system in
the interest of equity, efficiency and sustainability, especially in a context where
expansion of water supply faces major economic, financial and technological constraints. He cites evidence in the form of various systems of water rights functioning
under different socio-technical regimes in the country, and suggests that their existence – often for decades and centuries – is evidence that a water rights system is
consistent with what may be called an Indian water ethos. It seems then the core
issue with regard to the functioning of a water rights system may be understanding
the relationship between water rights systems that already exist on the ground and
how they may articulate with a new water rights system that may be imposed
through conscious policy intervention.
V Ratna Reddy’s analysis of the potential of different regulatory instruments and
demand management of water (Chap. 10) suggests the limitations of the commonly
used instruments like pricing, supply regulation, direct and indirect policy regulation. He argues that these regulations have had a limited impact on account of the
complex socioeconomic and resource systems, but also because of a lack of synergy

 
6

V. Narain

or mutual complementarity among the different policy instruments. He calls for
greater synergy in the use of different policy instruments such that they do not work
at objectives counter to each other. He further argues that policies for demand management of water have paid little explicit attention to the equity dimensions of water
use and access. While community based approaches to regulate the use of groundwater have had some positive effect, they have remained little more than pilots in the
absence of policy support or an enabling environment to scale them up.

1.1.2

Gender and Integrated Water Resource Management
in India

IWRM (Integrated Water Resource Management) emerged as a new paradigm challenging the technocratic focus of water management over the previous decades.
IWRM emphasizes integration across uses, sectors and disciplines while taking
cognizance of gender and equity concerns (Mollinga et al. 2006). The major critique
around IWRM has been the lack of political edge in the way it has been conceptualised and implemented (Kulkarni 2014). An overemphasis on River Basin organizations and formal organization structures without an understanding of the local
institutional context in which the paradigm of IWRM is to be implemented are
known to have severely limited the relevance of the paradigm to the South Asian
context (Mollinga et al. 2006).
Tushaar Shah and Barbara van Koppen, critically analysing the relevance of the
paradigm to Indian contexts (Chap. 2), note that IWRM, in its present form, presents itself as a package of interventions of a ‘’one size fits all’ nature around demand
side management; the ‘copybook’ nature of IWRM reforms has been shaped by the
global water discourse driven by international organizations. In developing countries in which these reforms have been experimented with, there was little effort to
tailor the reform packages to local contexts. Hence, these reforms failed to address
the pressing water management challenges that these countries were confronted
with. The IWRM package, further, offers no guidance on what to do with the plethora of water institutions in the country. These reforms, they further note, also do not
respond to the priorities of the poor in developing countries.
The current paradigm of IWRM, advocating direct demand management, is
therefore at odds with the informal nature of water economies characterizing India
and other countries at early stages of their development paths. The transformation
of an informal water economy into a formal one, further, takes place through a long
process of economic growth. Urbanization and occupational diversification are key
processes characterising this transition. However, Shah and van Koppen suggest
that the IWRM package may still be relevant to formal and urban sectors of India’s
water economy.
Gender mainstreaming has been an important component of the global discourse
on IWRM. Gender, referring to the socially defined roles of what it constitutes to be

 
1

Introduction: Towards a Discursive Analysis of Indian Water Policy

7

male or female, is a social construction whose meaning is contested and negotiated
(Zwarteveen 2013). Gender mainstreaming in water has been understood to be a
slow and difficult process (Kulkarni 2014; Joshi 2014; Ahmed 2008). Changes in
policy approaches to water management are known to have made little dent on the
perverse niches created by the intersection of caste, class, gender and race in which
women often find themselves (Joshi 2014). In her analysis of water and gender relations in this book, Seema Kulkarni (Chap. 5) traces the evolution of the gender
discourse in the international water and development agenda and looks at the changing trajectory of policy efforts at mainstreaming gender in India. She argues that the
rhetoric of gender would remain little more than a rhetoric unless it is located historically and understood as a set of complex relations between the different genders,
defined identities and embedded in hegemonic power relations cutting across caste,
class and race that serve the interests of state, capital and patriarchy. She notes that
while in many cases the creation of formal spaces for women to participate and
influence decision-making in water management has facilitated their empowerment,
very often the creation of such formal spaces has made little difference, as women
continue to be entrenched in unique niches created by the intersection of caste, class
and race.
Ahmed (2008) rightly notes that it may not be possible to link all water resource
planning in one national or country level IWRM strategy as proposed by advocates
of IWRM. IWRM may indeed seem rational for some countries in Africa or Europe
to develop; there is too much diversity and the need for context specific approaches
is critical for a nation like India. However, IWRM does provide a lens to look at
water resources holistically (Ahmed 2008; Shah and Prakash 2014). Gender analysis provides one of the means to do so. It is necessary however, more broadly to
understand how water intersects with and transforms gender relations at different
institutional levels or social contexts (Ahmed 2008; Kulkarni 2014; Joshi 2014).

1.1.3

Expanding Access to Clean Water and Sanitation

Aidan Cronin, Anjal Prakash, Praveen Sridhar and Sue Coates (Chap. 4) review the
progress made in India in the expansion of access to safe water supply and sanitation. They challenge the notion of water scarcity being a predominantly physical
phenomenon and emphasize instead the role of institutional factors in shaping water
scarcity, much on the lines of Mehta (2005). Though there are important positive
recommendations towards expanding the access to water in the 12th Five Year plan,
political will and systematic implementation of the proposed reforms, they argue,
will be necessary. Recent policy efforts emphasize decentralization; however, on
account of paucity of resources and poor devolution of powers to the lower levels,
local bodies remain limited in their ability to manage effectively. Though policy
initiatives have sought to create a wide variety of institutions at the local level, many
of them are not accountable at the community level. Thus, decentralization poses
new challenges for power and accountability in local governance.

 
8

V. Narain

Prakash Nelliyat (Chap. 8) undertakes a comprehensive review of the challenges
of water pollution in India and observes that water pollution has not been a major
topic of political debate yet, and therefore, political instruments have been scarcely
implemented. Emission-based standards have not been very effective so far, since
they are rarely monitored and only occasionally enforced. He also argues that it may
be incorrect to adopt western water quality objectives that are inappropriate to the
level of development and economic state of the adopting country. Though India has
attempted to solve the water pollution issues through legislative and policy measures with huge budgets over a period of time, significant progress has not been
achieved in this direction. He advocates an overhaul of the policy approach to combating the problem of water pollution, using a mix of strategies such as policy advocacy, governance and enforcement, stakeholders’ Initiatives and capacity building,
the use of economic instruments and better coordination among line departments.

1.1.4

Technological Solutions and the Inter-linking of Rivers

Perhaps no subject has received as much critical attention, or been the subject of so
much debate in the context of India’s water governance as the proposal for the linking up of our major rivers. At the heart of these proposals has been the narrative that
the transfer of water from India’s water surplus basins to her deficit basins provides
the key solution to her water problems. The debate on these proposals has been
characterized by polarized views among their proponents and opponents. On the
one hand has been the technocracy that seems to propagate the narrative that the
solution to India’s water woes lies in large-scale engineering solutions. This narrative has been challenged by the opponents of large-scale engineering solutions on
grounds of the high social, ecological and environmental costs of such projects. On
the one hand, the river-linking project in India has been criticised for the reductionist foundations of the paradigm that seeks to assert man’s prerogative to control
water (D’Souza 2002, 2003). On the other hand, it has been criticised for its failure
to consider the systemic nature of the relationships between water, habitat, society
and biodiversity (Bandopadhyay and Parveen 2004). This has created space for a
balanced and informed debate on the subject.
In this backdrop, Upali Amerasinghe and Tushaar Shah (Chap. 7) take a critical
look at this contentious proposal. They draw on a wide range of studies to assess the
validity of various claims made with regard to the social, economic, hydrological
and environmental facets of these transfers. They conclude that not withstanding the
strong judicial attention that the proposal has received, the idea of a National River
Linking Project may have come a decade or two too soon; the underlying assumptions behind the proposal for the inter-linking of rivers have changed since when the
proposal was first conceptualized. The project, they conclude, is too large to conduct a holistic analysis leading to a complete assessment of its costs and benefits.
There is too little data available in the public domain. They also cite several studies
to challenge some of the claims made by the proponents of these proposals. These

 
1

Introduction: Towards a Discursive Analysis of Indian Water Policy

9

relate to the intended impacts of the proposals on water and food security as well as
employment generation.
Narayanamoorthy (Chap. 11) reviews the potential of different water saving
technologies in India; his analysis suggests that the water saving gains can be substantial through a concerted effort at the adoption of these technologies. While the
efficiency gains from the adoption of micro-irrigation are substantial, further
research is needed to examine the social and institutional conditions that will facilitate the adoption of these technologies in Indian contexts as well as the social profile
of the users of these technologies.

1.1.5

Independent Regulatory Authorities: Balancing
Autonomy and Control

The subject of Independent Regulatory Authorities (IRAs) has generated much
debate in India, especially with regard to questions of regulation and autonomy in
the water sector (Warghade and Wagle 2014; Rao and Badiger 2014). Sachin
Warghade (Chap. 6) examines critically the evolution of IRAs in the country. The
functioning of IRAs raises important questions regarding both accountability and
autonomy in the water sector; however, Warghade raises more basic questions
regarding their appropriateness to Indian settings. He proposes that a decentered
approach, with a strong knowledge component and backed by a pro-people normative framework may lead to a more effective and comprehensive framework for
water regulation in India.

1.2

Indian Water Policy and Governance Research
for the Future

As noted earlier in this chapter, South Asian Water Resources scholarship has experienced an upsurge in recent years; given the present pattern of societal developments, water problems will become more severe in the years ahead (Mollinga 2008).
In this context, a call is made for a pluralistic and integrated framework for formulating and implementing water policies in South Asia (Prakash et al. 2013). A case
is made to listen to the multiple voices that are emerging in understanding water; it
is argued that it is necessary to create space for dialogue among civil society and
citizens (Lahiri-Dutt 2008). This is necessary particularly in the wake of a greater
role for actors other than the state, notably civil society, in influencing water policy,
both in terms of content as well as the processes of policy formulation (Narayanan
et al. 2014; Narain et al. 2014).
The chapters in this book suggest that the dominant modes of water policy analysis in the country have witnessed a change. This is perhaps in the wake of a call for

 
10

V. Narain

more reflective thinking on the types and modes of critique in light of a persistent
deadlock in transforming dominant approaches to water resources development and
management (Mollinga 2008). As noted earlier in this chapter, water scholars are
increasingly turning their attention to the relationships between the hydrological,
technological, economic and social dimensions of water management; rather than
seeing them in isolation. Issues of gender and equity are gaining prominence in
discourses on water management, breaking conventional polarizations that have
characterised the debate and discourses on the subject.
Within the broad realm of policy studies, the contributions in this book, speak to
the prescriptive dimensions of water policy.5 Further research should unpack more
explicitly the process dimensions of water policy in India, focusing on a discursive
analysis of public policy. There is increasing recognition of the processes of contestation in water policy formulation and implementation (Saravanan and Ip 2013).
Further research should capture the role of competing narratives and discourses on
the framing of water policies, as well as the role of different interest groups in
propagating and perpetuating these. The analysis of the ‘ethnographies of the state’,
for instance, provides one entry point (Sangameswaran 2013).
There is growing recognition of increasing stress on water resources. Several
writings in the Indian water literature, including some contributions in this book,
paint a ‘scare scenario’ with regard to the country’s water future. An important
implication of the on-going process of democratization of water governance in the
country, however is that coupled with the multiplication of stresses on water, this
will create a more visible demand for platforms for negotiation, conflict resolution
and dialogue across different categories of users and uses. This could happen at
various levels: rural-urban/periurban, regional and transboundary. Research should
document the creation of such platforms, as well as the role of power and politics in
shaping their functioning. In some contexts, such as those of urbanization shaping
rural-urban water flows,6 such research should challenge implicit biases in water
resources planning and address imbalances in the allocation of water both from
equity and sustainability perspectives.

References
Ahmed, S. (2008). Gender and integrated water resources management in South Asia: The challenge of community-based alternatives. In K. Lahiri-Dutt & R. Wasson (Eds.), Water first.
Issues and challenges for nations and communities in South Asia (pp. 185–206). New Delhi:
Sage.
Ballabh, V. (2008). Governance of water: Institutional alternatives and political economy. New
Delhi: Sage.

5

For a discussion on the prescriptive and process dimensions of public policy, see Hogwood and
Gunn (1984).
6
See, for instance, Narain et al. (2013).

 
1

Introduction: Towards a Discursive Analysis of Indian Water Policy

11

Bandopadhyay, J., & Parveen, S. (2004). Interlinking of rivers in India: Assessing the justification.
Economic and Political Weekly, XXXIX(50), 5304–5317.
D’Souza, R. (2002). The Narmada dammed: An inquiry into the politics of development. New
Delhi: Penguin.
D’Souza, R. (2003). Damming the Mahanadi river: The emergence of multi-purpose river valley
development in India (1943–46). The Indian Economic and Social History Review, 40(1),
81–105.
Dubaash, N. (2002). Tubewell capitalism. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Gyawali, D. (2014). Foreword. In V. Narain, C. G. Goodrich, J. Chourey, & A. Prakash (Eds.),
Globalization of water governance in South Asia (pp. xix–xxiii). New Delhi: Routledge/Taylor
and Francis.
Hogwood, B. W., & Gunn, L. A. (1984). Policy analysis for the real world. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Jairath, J. (1999). Participatory irrigation management: Experiments in Andhra Pradesh. Economic
and Political Weekly, XX(13), A-2–A-10.
Joshi, D. (2014). Women, water, caste and gender: The rhetoric of reform in India’s drinking water
sector. In V. Narain, C. G. Goodrich, J. Chourey, & A. Prakash (Eds.), Globalization of water
governance in South Asia (pp. 35–52). New Delhi: Routledge/Taylor and Francis.
Jurriens, M., Mollinga, P. P., & Wester, P. (1996). Scarcity by design: Protective irrigation in India
and Pakistan. Liquid Gold Paper 1. Wagenningen: Wagenningen Agricultural University and
International Institute for Land Reclamation and Improvement.
Kulkarni, S. (2014). Gender, water and well-being. In V. Narain, C. G. Goodrich, J. Chourey, &
A. Prakash (Eds.), Globalization of water governance in South Asia (pp. 19–34). New Delhi:
Routledge/Taylor and Francis.
Kumar, M. D., Scott, C. A., & Singh, O. P. (2011). Inducing the shift from flat-rate or free agricultural power to metered supply: Implications for groundwater depletion and power sector viability in India. Journal of Hydrology, 409(2011), 382–394.
Lahiri-Dutt, K. (2008). Introduction: Placing water first. In K. Lahiri-Dutt & J. Wasson (Eds.),
Water first. Issues and challenges for nations and communities in South Asia (pp. I–xlix). New
Delhi: Sage.
Lahiri-Dutt, K., & Wasson, R. J. (Eds.). (2008). Water first. Issues and challenges for nations and
communities in South Asia. New Delhi: Sage.
Mehta, L. (2005). The politics and poetics of water. Naturalising scarcity in western India.
Hyderabad: Orient Longman.
Moench, M. (1994). Approaches to groundwater management: To control or enable. Economic and
Political Weekly, 29(39), A-135–A-146.
Mollinga, P. P. (2001). Power in motion: A critical assessment of canal irrigation reform, with a
focus on India (IndianPIM working paper/Monograph series, No. 1). New Delhi: Indian
Network on Participatory Irrigation Management.
Mollinga, P. P. (2008). Foreword. In K. Lahiri-Dutt & R. Wasson (Eds.), Water first. Issues and
challenges for nations and communities in South Asia (pp. i–xvi). New Delhi: Sage.
Mollinga, P. P., Dixit, A., & Athukorala, K. (2006). Integrated water resources management:
Global theory, emerging practice, and local needs. Water in South Asia (Vol. 1). New Delhi/
Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Mosse, J. (2009). Water ethics and business. In M. R. Llamas, L. Martinez-Cortina, & A. Mukerji
(Eds.), Water ethics. London: CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group.
Narain, V. (1998). Towards a new groundwater institution for India. Water Policy, 1(3), 357–365.
Narain, V. (2000). India’s water crisis: The challenges of governance. Water Policy, 2(6),
433–444.
Narain, V. (2003). Institutions, technology and water control: Water users associations and irrigation management reform in two large-scale systems in India. Hyderabad: Orient Longman.
Narain, V. (2004). Brackets and black boxes. Research on water users’ associations. Water Policy,
6(3), 185–196.

 
12

V. Narain

Narain, V. (2008). Crafting institutions for collective action in canal irrigation. Can we break the
deadlocks? In V. Ballabh (Ed.), Governance of water: Institutional alternatives and political
economy (pp. 159–173). New Delhi: Sage.
Narain, V., Khan, M. S. A., Sada, R., Singh, S., & Prakash, A. (2013). Urbanization, periurban
water security and human well-being. A perspective from four South Asian cities. Water
International, 38(7), 930–940.
Narain, V., Goodrich, C. G., Chourey, J., & Prakash, A. (Eds.). (2014). Globalization of water
governance in South Asia. New Delhi: Routledge/Taylor and Francis.
Narayanan, N. C., Parasuraman, S., & Ariyabandu, R. (2014). Water governance and civil society
responses in South Asia. New Delhi: Routledge/Taylor and Franics.
Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions for collective action.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ostrom, E. (1992). Crafting institutions for self-governing irrigation systems. San Francisco:
Institute for Contemporary Studies.
Parthasarathy, R. (1998). Reforms in irrigation management: Bottoms-up vs top-down models
(GIDR working paper, No. 104). Ahmedabad: Gujarat Institute of Development Research.
Prakash, A. (2005). The dark zone. Groundwater irrigation, politics and social power in North
Gujarat. Hyderabad: Orient Longman.
Prakash, A., Singh, S., Goodrich, C. G., & Janakarajan, S. (Eds.). (2013). Water resources policies
in South Asia. New Delhi: Routledge/Taylor and Francis.
Rao, D. B., & Badiger, S. (2014). Understanding emerging independent regulatory frameworks:
Lessons for reforming Karnataka’s water governance. In V. Narain, C. G. Goodrich, J. Chourey,
& A. Prakash (Eds.), Globalization of water governance in South Asia (pp. 176–192). New
Delhi: Routledge/Taylor and Francis.
Roth, D., & Vincent, L. (Eds.). (2013). Controlling the water. Matching technology and institutions
in irrigation management in India and Nepal. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Saleth, R. M. (1996). Water institutions in India: Economics, law and policy. Institute of Economic
Growth. New Delhi: Commonwealth Publishers.
Sangameswaran, P. (2013). Scale, diverse economies, and ethnographies of the state: Concepts for
theorizing water policy. In A. Prakash, S. Singh, C. G. Goodrich, & S. Janakarajan (Eds.),
Water resources policies in South Asia (pp. 152–169). New Delhi: Routledge/Taylor and
Francis.
Saravanan, V. S., & Ip, D. (2013). Water policies are never implemented, but negotiated: Analysing
integration of policies using a Bayesian network. In A. Prakash, S. Singh, C. G. Goodrich, &
S. Janakarajan (Eds.), Water resources policies in South Asia (pp. 66–95). New Delhi:
Routledge/Taylor and Francis.
Shah, T. (1993). Ground water markets and irrigation development. Political economy and public
policy. Bombay: Oxford University Press.
Shah, T. (2009). Taming the anarchy: Groundwater governance in South Asia. Washington, DC:
RFF Press.
Shah, T. (2013). Climate change and groundwater: India’s opportunities for mitigation and adaptation. In A. Prakash, S. Singh, C. G. Goodrich, & S. Janakarajan (Eds.), Water resources policies
in South Asia (pp. 213–243). New Delhi: Routledge/Taylor and Francis.
Shah, A., & Prakash, A. (2014). Towards integrated water resources policies in South Asia: From
critique to constructive engagement. In A. Prakash, C. G. Goodrich, & S. Singh (Eds.),
Informing water policies in South Asia (pp. 27–48). New Delhi: Routledge/Taylor and Francis.
Shashidharan, E. M. (2000). Civil Society Oranizations and Irrigation Management in Gujarat,
India. In P. P. Mollinga (Ed.), Water for food and rural development. Approaches and initiatives
in South Asia (pp. 247–265). New Delhi: Sage.
Urs, K., & Whittel, R. (2009). Resisting reform? Water profits and democracy. New Delhi: Sage.
Warghade, S., & Wagle, S. (2014). Need for reforming the reform: Incompatibility and usurpation
of water sector reforms in the Indian state of Maharashtra. In V. Narain, C. G. Goodrich,

 
1

Introduction: Towards a Discursive Analysis of Indian Water Policy

13

J. Chourey, & A. Prakash (Eds.), Globalization of water governance in South Asia (pp. 159–
175). New Delhi: Routledge/Taylor and Francis.
Zwarteveen, M. (2013). Seeing women and questioning gender in water management. In
A. Prakash, S. Singh, C. G. Goodrich, & S. Janakarajan (Eds.), Water resources policies in
South Asia (pp. 38–65). New Delhi: Routledge/Taylor and Francis.

 
Chapter 2

The Precept and Practice of Integrated Water
Resources Management (IWRM) in India
Tushaar Shah and Barbara van Koppen

Abstract Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) has been advanced as
a response to growing problems of water scarcity in the developing world. While the
precept of the IWRM process is unexceptionable, its practice has meant a package
of interventions. The trouble with the ‘IWRM package’, and indeed the global water
governance debate as a whole, is its intent to transform, all at once, a predominantly
informal water economy into a predominantly formal one—something that would
normally be the result of a long process of economic growth and the transformation
that comes in its wake. In the IWRM discourse, formalizing informal water economies is improving water governance. But evidence across the world suggests that
there is no shortcut for a poor society to morph its informal water economy into a
formal one; the process by which this happens is organically tied to wider processes
of economic growth. When countries try to force the pace of formalization, as they
will no doubt do, interventions come unstuck. Interventions are more likely to work
if they aim to improve the working of a water economy while it is informal.
Keywords Informal economy • Governance • Institutional arrangement • Economic
growth • Groundwater

2.1

IWRM: A Response to Water Scarcity

Water scarcity has emerged, especially during the past decade, as an important theme
in discussions on India’s socio-economic future. Indeed, by 2025, by many accounts,
much of India is expected to be part of the 1/3rd of the world destined to face
T. Shah (*)
IWMI-India Water Policy Program, International Water Management Institute,
“Jal Tarang”, Smruti Park, B/H IRMA, Anand, Gujarat 388001, India
e-mail: t.shah@cgiar.org
B. van Koppen
Principal Researcher Poverty, Gender and Water, International Water Management Institute,
PBag X813, Silverton 0127, South Africa
e-mail: B.vanKoppen@cgiar.org
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
V. Narain, A. Narayanamoorthy (eds.), Indian Water Policy
at the Crossroads: Resources, Technology and Reforms,
Global Issues in Water Policy 16, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-25184-4_2

15

 
16

T. Shah and B. van Koppen

absolute water scarcity (Seckler et al. 1999; Cosgrove 2003; Cosgrove and Rijsberman
2000; Rosegrant et al. 2002). The intensification of water scarcity is expected to play
out in myriad different ways with variegated consequences. A major consequence
will be the deepening of ‘water poverty’, a phrase used to indicate difficulty people
face in securing adequate and reliable access to water for productive and consumptive uses. A related concern is also the deterioration of water environment, reflected
in drying up of wetlands, deterioration in water quality, desertification.
Global discussions over the past decade have resulted in a variety of viewpoints
about how best developing countries can cope with this imminent condition. At one
extreme, researchers suggest that crying need is for honing even more than in the
past the social capacity of communities and societies to adapt to water scarcity
(Ohlsson and Turton 1999; Wolfe and Brooks 2003). However, a more widely
shared view is the urgent need to make a transition from water resource development mode—in which countries like India have been steeped since 1830s when
Arthur Cotton rebuilt the grand anicut on Cauvery—to water resource management
mode by embracing Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM).
At one level, IWRM is a philosophy. Global Water Partnership (2000) for
instance defines it as “a process which promotes coordinated development and management of water, land and related resources, in order to maximize the resultant
economic and social welfare in an equitable manner without compromising the sustainability of vital ecosystems”. This is hard to find fault with. However, at an operational level, IWRM even though fuzzy (Biswas 2004), is centrally about integrated
and direct management of sectoral and aggregate water demand, something which
is absent in most developing countries. As distinct from the supply-side focus of
public policy action in water sector—of governments as well as donors—on ‘developing’ the resource by investing in infrastructure, IWRM discussions emphasize the
need to embrace demand-side management. In many low-income Asian and African
countries where it has been aggressively promoted by international agencies in
recent years, the ‘IWRM package’ has basically included a clutch of following
instruments:
• A National Water Policy so that there is a cohesive, well-understood normative
framework to guide all players in the sector.
• A water law and regulatory framework for coordinated action for sustainable
water resources management;
• Recognition of the River basin as the unit of water and land resources planning and management and creation of River Basin Organizations in place of
territorial/functional departments;
• Treating water as an economic good by pricing water resource as well as services, especially outside life-line uses, to reflect its scarcity value so that it is
efficiently used and allocated to high value uses;
• Creation of water rights, preferably tradable, by instituting a system of water
withdrawal permits;
• Participatory Water Resource Management with involvement of women so that
‘water becomes everybody’s business’.

 
2

The Precept and Practice of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)…

17

In dozens of developing countries, adopting IWRM has essentially meant implementing variations of the above package. India’s various enunciations of National
Water Policy, including the latest in 2012 (Government of India 2012) have sworn
by several of these principles. In Sri Lanka, for instance, the 2001 draft water policy
and water law provided for establishing state ownership of all water, the institution
of water use rights through withdrawal permits, pricing of water in all uses, transferable water permits to encourage trade in water rights, replacement of existing water
organizations by river basin organizations (Samad 2005). Embracing the above, it is
implied in the IWRM discourse, will help alleviate water poverty by improving
access to water and minimizing environmental ill-effects associated with current
patterns of water resources development in developing countries like India
(Lawrence et al. 2003). Among several things, IWRM involves working to improve
the potency and effectiveness of three pillars of the water institutional framework:
water policies, water laws and water administration in managing the water affairs of
a society through a new emphasis on direct water demand management (see, e.g.
Bandaragoda and Firdousi 1992; Merrey 1996; Frederiksen and Vissia 1998;
Holmes 2000; Saleth 2004; Saleth and Dinar 2004).
This new class of concerns has put on the backburner an earlier class of yet-to-beresolved concerns about the limitations of ‘supply side initiatives’ with which India
and many other developing countries struggled during the 1970s through the early
1990s. These had to do centrally with the need for and the efficiency of appropriate
water infrastructure and services, promoting their financial and social sustainability,
improving the performance of irrigation, and water supply and sanitation projects
along several dimensions and at multiple levels: techno-economic efficiency; cost
recovery; spatial and social equity in access to project benefits; investment in operation and maintenance, and so on. There were major issues of institutional reforms in
public irrigation projects as well as rural and urban water supply and sanitation projects with emphasis shifting back and forth between reforming the bureaucracy to
user-participatory management to public-private partnerships. In these discussions,
the focus of analysis and action was squarely at the level of the user, community or a
project; and the concerns of researchers and practitioners were about techno-economic efficiency, equity, socio-economic and environmental sustainability of infrastructure investments. Even before these issues have begun to get resolved, the
IWRM paradigm has begun to shift the locus of policy discussions from improving
water infrastructure and services at community and project levels to improving the
management of water resources at the level of river basins.

2.2

Water Poverty: Is It Caused by Water Scarcity?

A critical implicit assumption underlying the IWRM discourse is that water poverty—reflecting lack of access to water for productive and consumptive needs for
communities—is a result of the water scarcity and the failure of water institutions
and policies to counter it. If this is indeed the case, then, embracing IWRM can be
a big answer to water poverty of nations. But is this really the case?

 
18

T. Shah and B. van Koppen

The Water Poverty Index (WPI) covering 147 countries published by researchers
from Keele University and Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Wallingford, UK in
2003 provides a readymade global data base to explore the relationship between
water poverty and water scarcity (Lawrence et al. 2003; Sullivan and Meigh 2003).1
Table 2.1 below summarizes the results of multiple regression results that underpin
our discussions in the above paragraphs. The data set for 147 countries used is the
one compiled by Lawrence et al. (2003). The regressions use the WPI and component indices as dependent variables; Human Development Index (HDI) as well as
Purchasing Power Parity (ppp) _-adjusted GDP are from UNDP 2003. Figures in
round brackets below B-coefficients are standardized B-coefficients and represent
the relative significance of included explanatory variables in explaining the
variations in the dependent variable. Figures in square brackets are values of the
t-ratio; for the sample size of 147, any value of t-ratio above 2.0 is significant.
Table 2.1 Determinants of water poverty of countries
Dependent
variable

1

Water poverty
index (0–100)

17.761
(12.261)

2

Water poverty
index (0–100)

20.646
[12.765]

3

Index of access
to water (0–20)
(WAP index)
Index of access
to water (0–20)
(WAP index)
Index of water
environment
(0–20)
Index of water
environment
(0–20)

−3.491
[−3.743]

4

5

6

1

Intercept

−1.862
[−1.845]
7.215
[12.331]
15.09
[10.806]

B-co-efficient for
Index of
water
resource
Human
availability development
(0–20)
index (0–1)
1.086
43.283
(0.433)
(0.796)
[13.048]
[24.022]
1.205
(0.482)
[12.508]
0.037
24.307
(0.029)
(0.867)
[0.691]
[20.95]
0.103
(0.080)
[1.721]
0.138
(0.292)
[3.962]
0.149
(0.314)
[4.773]

Index of
GDP/capita
(PPP adjusted
in ‘000 US$)
(0–1)

Square
of GDP
per
capita
in US$)

39.574
(0.764)
[23.65]

R2
0.842

0.788

0.754

22.22
(0.831)
[17.863]
3.804
(0.388)
[5.273]
−23.778
(−2.425)
[−5.191]

0.691

0.227

21.638
(2.842)
[6.082]

0.387

The approach and methodology used by these researchers were similar to those used for computing the Human Development Index (HDI) (see, UNDP 2000). The index was constructed by combining five component indices that cover water resource endowments, access to water, human
capacity, water use efficiency, and quality of water environment. Each of the five component indices was given equal weight to generate the Water Poverty Index that takes values in the range of 0
and 100, the higher the value, lower the water poverty.

 
2

The Precept and Practice of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)…

19

Like the global discussions, the authors of WPI too subscribe to the ‘waterscarcity-determining-water-poverty’ hypothesis when they say their aim was to
‘express an interdisciplinary measure which … indicates the degree to which water
scarcity impacts on human populations’ (Lawrence et al. 2003). But is this hypothesis borne out by global database painstakingly compiled by the WPI authors themselves? A regression of WPI run on water resources per capita of the 147 countries
suggests no direct relationship between the two. It might be argued that the real
indicator of water poverty is “Water Access Poverty (WAP)” sub-component of the
WPI suggestive of the levels of ‘water welfare’ achieved. However, the correlation
between WAP index and water resource endowments too was found to be low. For
nearly every level of per capita water resource endowments, we find countries which
are at the bottom as well as top of the WAP index. A least-square line fitted to WAP
index and per capita water resource endowment of countries turns out to be virtually
flat, suggesting no relationship of quantitative significance between water endowments of nations and the water welfare of their citizens. Laos, Nicaragua, Cambodia,
Bangladesh, Sierra Leon have much higher per capita water endowments compared
to Egypt, Saudi Arabia, UK and Mauritius; yet the former are far more ‘Water
Access Poor’ than the latter.
These analyses show that while water availability has only a weak relationship
with overall socio-economic development, WAP index is strongly related to the
HDI. The higher the HDI of a country, lower the water poverty, regardless of a
country’s water endowments. Our analyses support an even bolder hypothesis that
WAP is strongly and positively related to per capita GDP (adjusted for ppp) (see
regression 4 Table 2.1).
In exploring the relationship between the quality of environment and levels of
economic development, researchers have already postulated and tested the
‘Environmental Kuznet’s Curve’ which would suggest that as countries begin from
low levels of economic development, the quality of their environment first declines
as intensive economic growth uses natural resources as ‘factors of production’
(Bhattarai and Hammig 2001). However, as levels of living improve, growing
demand for ‘environmental amenity’ generates pressures to seek avenues for economic growth that are light in the demands they make on scarce natural resources—
what Gleick (2002) calls ‘soft water path’. If this were true, an index of environmental
quality would show an inverted U relationship with levels of economic growth. Our
analyses based on data from 147 countries supports this inverted U relationship in
regression 6 in Table 2.1 (note: the higher the value of the index, lower the quality
of water environment). It suggests that as levels of material well-being improve for
a majority of a country’s people, need for clean water environment becomes a concern for the majority rather than just the environment groups, governments and
international donors.
In regressions 1 and 2, besides HDI and GDP respectively, water resource endowment is statistically significant and has a large standardized B-coefficient, likely because
water resource endowment is a component of WPI. In regressions 3 and 4, where
WAP—the true measure of water welfare of a country—is the dependent variable, however, water resource endowment variable turns insignificant and its standardized

 
20

T. Shah and B. van Koppen

B-coefficients are very small, too. These suggest that water resource endowments have
no relationship with the water poverty of nations. In these regressions, HDI and GDP per
capita emerge as the key determinants of WAP with large t-ratios as well as standardized
B-coefficients. Regression 5 suggests resource availability as well as GDP are significant determinants of water environment; but the overall fit of this regression improves
greatly (as suggested by the increase in R2 in regression 6 when the squared value of
GDP is added; it emerges as highly significant, turns GDP co-efficient into a negative
value thus suggesting better fit for a U-shaped relationship).

2.3

IWRM in an Informal Water Economy

There is a need to unpack this apparently neat relationship between water poverty
and overall economic growth. Many people find it hard to accept these results
because it apparently leads them to conclude that low-income countries like India
have little or no scope to improve their water resources management; and that economic growth is the only path for them to reduce their water poverty. A more logical
conclusion to draw from this analysis is that, in order to be effective, water resource
management strategies of nations have to be context-specific; and the defining
aspect of the context that matters is the position of a country in the evolutionary
process of economic development rather than its water resource endowment (see
also, World Bank 2005). This analysis raises questions about the usefulness of the
one-size-fits-all frameworks—such as the IWRM paradigm—that dominate global
discussions about how developing countries can put their water sectors in order. Use
of economic pricing and withdrawal permits to encourage efficient allocation and
use of water, transforming irrigation bureaucracies into river basin organizations for
Integrated River Basin Management, enforcing laws to regulate groundwater pumping and controlling non-point pollution of aquifers are some of the stock policy
reforms that are commonly recommended because these help orderly functioning of
water economies in industrialized countries; however, evidence is mounting that
many of these reforms are unimplementable in developing countries.
The constraint developing countries run into in implementing these arises from
the highly informal nature of their water economies; and this has nothing to do with
their water scarcity or abundance but has everything to do with their being at early
stages of overall economic development. By definition, an informal economy is that
part of the economy that remains outside formal mechanisms of governance—law,
policy and administration (Fiege 1990). Incorporation of informal economies into
what economic historian Douglass North (1990) called the ‘modern transactions
sector’ occurs gradually as part of overall processes of economic growth. Until substantial proportion of a sectoral economy gets formalized, it would be well nigh
impossible to bring it meaningfully within the ambit of formal structures of direct
governance. In the context of developing countries like India, paradigms like
IWRM—advocating direct demand management—are then fundamentally at odds
with the highly informal nature of their water economies.

 
2

The Precept and Practice of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)…

21

Take the case of India. Government documents claim that protected water supply2 covers 95 % of the country’s rural habitations. Yet a large nation-wide survey
in 1998 that reached out to some 130,000 rural and urban households showed a different picture (NSSO 1999a: report 449) showed that nearly 80 % of India’s rural
households surveyed self-supplied their domestic water requirements—from
domestic or irrigation wells, tanks, ponds, streams, etc—and were not in contact
with any service provider or public or community agency in the formal sector. For
urban households, the opposite held with over 75 % of the households ‘connected’—
which suggests that as India urbanizes, growing proportions of its population would
come into contact with formal water service providers. Comparing the data across
states suggests that in poorer states like Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, all or most rural
households self-supply their domestic water, where as in somewhat better-off states
such as Haryana, Punjab and Goa, domestic water supply gets increasingly ‘formalized’, suggesting that even rural households begin getting connected to some public
water supply system as village economies grow, regardless of water resource
endowments. Studies in six Indian cities during 2003 showed that economically
strong households were much more likely to be connected to public water supply
systems and poorer ones either self-supply or rely on informal sector service providers (Londhe et al. 2004).
The picture with irrigation is no different. Many researchers have shown that
although under the control of government bureaucracies, at the grassroots levels,
India’s canal systems are barely functioning anarchies, with informal institutional
arrangements ruling the roost. Even if we assume that farmers served with irrigation
by canals are in some sense connected to the ‘formal water economy’, the National
Sample Survey of 2002 (NSSO 2003) of 4646 villages throughout India showed
that government canals have increasingly lost out in relative share of irrigators: over
80 % of sample villages used irrigation mostly from wells but also from tanks, and
streams without being connected with, or under direct administrative influence of,
either the irrigation bureaucracy or any other formal agency. This is village-level
data; but much other evidence can be adduced from household level surveys in support of the fact that there is a great deal more irrigation going on in India than is
acknowledged; and over 4/5th of this is in the informal sector. Similar impression
emerges about the ownership and management of village water infrastructure. The
NSS 54th round of survey (NSSO 1999b, report 452: 46) in 1998 of 78,990 rural
households in 5110 villages throughout India suggests that 90 % of water infrastructural assets used by survey households were self-managed (and owned) by households; only around 10 % were owned and/or managed by government or local
community organizations.
This predominantly informal nature of India’s water economy raises questions
about the reach of the ‘three pillars’ of water governance: water policy, law and administration. It also raises questions not so much about the need for but about the practicality of implementing water pricing, basin level water allocation, and water legislation in
2

Which presumably means water supply through a local community-based or municipal body that
takes some responsibility of quality.

 
22

T. Shah and B. van Koppen

the Indian context. How to collect a water service price or a water resource fee or use
river basin agencies to allocate water amongst sectors and users if by far the majority
of users self-provide their water needs without being connected to any formal agency?
Likewise, how does any administration effectively enforce a groundwater law if 20
million farming households owning irrigation wells are strongly opposed to it, and the
rest are indifferent or weakly opposed to it, especially when the administration is an
instrument of a State that styles itself as a democratic welfare state?

2.4

IWRM Experience in Asia and Africa: Lessons for India

It is not surprising then that IWRM type policy interventions that many governments in Asia and Africa have adopted under the influence of global water discourse
have produced doubtful outcomes, besides deflecting them from addressing hereand-now supply-side issues in their water economies. During the past decade, the
government of Sri Lanka has made two bold but abortive attempts to push through
aggressive IWRM-style reforms in the water sector. The latest draft water policy
and water law provided for: (a) establishing state ownership of all water, (b) institution of water use rights through withdrawal permits, (c) pricing of water in all uses,
(d) transferable water permits to encourage trade in water rights, (e) replacement of
existing water organizations by river basin organizations—in sum, copybook IWRM
reforms. The media and civil society however took to the turf bitterly opposing the
very logic underlying the proposed reforms (Samad 2005). The government withdrew the reforms in a hurry; however, little thought was given to how exactly would
their provisions be implemented had the new water policy and law got passed.
Many South East Asian countries—notably, Thailand, Indonesia and Vietnam—
however, faced no such opposition from media and civil society and swiftly passed
water laws that incorporated key IWRM instruments including formation of river
basin organizations, registration of water users and issue of withdrawal permits as a
mechanism for creating tradable water rights, participatory management of irrigation systems through service contracts between agencies and users, and so on (Molle
2005). Molle, however, found little match between the reality of the water economies of these countries and the reforms borne out of ‘a global water discourse
largely driven by international organizations’. His review of the experience with
IWRM in Mekong led him to emphasize “a gap between formal and state-centered
initiatives and reality on the ground, which proceeds at a different pace. Lessons
learned elsewhere are certainly important but cannot be adopted indiscriminately
and must not be allowed to crowd out the emergence of endogenous and conditionspecific solutions.” In brief, IWRM came unstuck.
A similar feeling was echoed in a 2005 African Water Law workshop about
donor-induced IWRM style water policy reforms in many African countries (see
Shah and van Koppen 2005). With the onset of the 1990s, many African countries
took to IWRM wholesale. Almost everywhere, thinking about improving the
functioning of the water economy involved little effort to fit policy reforms to the

 
2

The Precept and Practice of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)…

23

local reality. Almost everywhere, water reforms: (a) declared water as state property, (b) instituted water withdrawal permits, (c) made water pricing mandatory for
all but domestic uses, and (d) led to the formation of river basin organizations with
water allocation mandate in water economies where the bulk of the water diverted
is (and most of the water users are) in the informal sector with little or no direct
contact with formal water agencies.
Institutional reforms take a long time to sink and produce desired impacts; in
Africa, however, evidence is already piling to suggest that IWRM reforms seem to
have done little to improve anything; instead, they created undue tension, hassle and
in extreme cases, dispossession of the poor. In particular, the Workshop identified
four problems:
(a) the aims that the water reforms seemed designed to achieve did not reflect the
current water sector priorities of the countries as viewed by national policy
makers, civil society and citizens;
(b) reforms touched only a small formalized segment of the water economy and a
tiny proportion of water use and users; as a result, their impacts on the water
sector were neither deep nor broad;
(c) however, they threatened disintegration of customary laws and institutions
evolved and used by communities; these are never ideal, but they are timetested, robust and perform their basic functions well; and
(d) they also created serious distortions, threatened dispossession of large numbers
of poor, and created new vested interests; these potentially deleterious impacts
were limited only by the fact that almost everywhere reforms failed to stick,
laws remained largely unenforced, water prices remained uncollected.
What, then, went wrong with Africa’s and Mekong countries’ water reforms?
Several things, it seems. Many countries just copied laws made elsewhere, just as
several states in India have blindly copied Andhra Pradesh’s law on participatory
irrigation management, and Pakistan Punjab has copied the water law of the state of
Colorado in the USA. In Africa too, countries did a ‘copy and paste’, for example,
of parts of the South African National Water Act. Without consultation, public participation, and a serious attempt to fit reforms to the context, the impact of these
reforms was bound to be negative if at all. And now, Ghana is having second
thoughts on its reform strategy and going back to the drawing board.
In Africa, as in some Asian countries like Sri Lanka, international agencies and
global thinking rather than analysis of local context and need has had a powerful
influence on the design of water sector reforms. Tanzania is a case in point; its 1991
water policy identified water development and provision as a key national policy
goal and argued for more water storage creation. However, creating new storage and
infrastructure was anathema to international donors; so Tanzania ended up doing
what donors would support: stock textbook IWRM, which included state ownership
of water resources, water withdrawal permits, water tax, legal institutional reform,
river basin organizations, Water User Associations (WUAs), but no attempt to get
what its people need most, more and better-managed infrastructure. Tanzanians all
along had plans to build storages but were secretive about it for the fear of donor

 
24

T. Shah and B. van Koppen

reprimand. In implementing the first phase of the IWRM project, however, the leadership figured that reforms could not deliver what Tanzania’s rural communities
need badly, i.e., better domestic water supply systems, improved irrigation water
control and better hydraulic infrastructure rather than water withdrawal permits,
water pricing and catchment organizations.
The only African country where water reforms have produced semblance of
improved governance of water resources is South Africa, which has emerged as a
model, exemplifying IWRM type water sector reforms in an emerging economy
context. South Africa is interesting because of its first-world-third-world duality. In
terms of income inequality, South Africa is next only to Brazil. 54 % of South
Africa’s water use is in agriculture; and 95 % of its farm lands are owned by a small
minority of white commercial farmers. In the Olifants, one of South Africa’s most
developed basins, 95 % of rural water resources is used by only 0.5 % of the population, white commercial farmers. The Gini coefficient for rural water use is as high
as 0.96 (Cullis and Van Koppen 2005).
South Africa’s ground-breaking water law (chapter 4 of the Act: section 21)
specifies the following uses and brings them within its IWRM mandate: (a) taking
water from a water resource; (b) storing water; (c) engaging in a stream-flow reduction activity, such as forestry; (d) control activities. E.g., irrigating with wastewater;
(e) discharging of wastewater into a water source through a pipe, canal, etc.
All those using water for the above purposes have to register, pay water use charge
and a water resource management charge. South Africa has all of 62,000 authorized,
billable water users (or registered primary diverters) that account for 11 billion m3 of
water allocation for commercial agriculture, 5 billion m3 for industry and municipal
uses, and 9 billion m3 for forestry. The Government of South Africa generates around 2
billion rand/year (USD 0.35 billion/year) as income from water tariffs. Managing these
62,000 users has been far from easy: it is difficult to ascertain actual volumes used; some
users did not register and some registered use could be unlawful under existing water
law. Many commercial farmers have extended their irrigated areas unlawfully, posing
that they are using their water allocation more efficiently. A critical issue for officials is
whether to rely on voluntary compliance or evolve a system of policing.
Interestingly, however, the South African IWRM leaves 95 % of its people out of
its ambit. All of 2.3 billion m3—about 10 %—of total water use is allocated to the
so called schedule-1 users, mostly rural black South Africans, who include some 18
million primary diverters of water for domestic use, irrigating tiny food plots and
small vegetable gardens. Their water use is neither subject to licenses nor billable.
If anything, everyone agrees, the crying need is to increase the access to and productive use of water by these users; yet the entire edifice of IWRM practices is unable
to meet this need.
It is not that South Africans are not trying; but they have just begun reforms in
black South Africa and find the going tough. 18 million rural South Africans, de
facto still partially ruled by 800 chiefs and 13,000 village headmen with their customary law and traditional institutions constitute a diffuse informal water economy
where self or community provision galore. Under the National Water Policy of 1997
and Water Act of 1998, South Africa was to be covered by 19 Catchment Management

 
2

The Precept and Practice of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)…

25

Agencies (CMAs). Only two fledgling CMAs have been formed so far with a far
more modest role than was originally envisaged. Moreover, for the five poorest
Water Management Areas it is increasingly recognized that a CMA will never be
financially viable at all, and could become, at best, business units within government. Formation of CMAs, turning over of small-holder irrigation systems to
WUAs, promotion of appropriate technologies—central to improving the lives of
the vast majority of South Africans—remain major challenges that the country’s
water reforms are yet to begin to meet. These are also the challenges facing India,
Bangladesh, Nepal and numerous poor countries. IWRM is working in European
South Africa, but the African South Africa has to begin at the beginning.
The lesson India needs to learn from the experience of all these countries is centrally about the gap between the precept and practice of IWRM. There can be little
questioning the basic IWRM premises such as that water should be priced to reflect
its scarcity value, that it is best managed at basin level, that reform of property rights
will promote its efficient and sustainable use. The question is how to make these
stick in water economies that are predominantly informal. All the evidence we have
suggests that these work best where:
(a) primary water diverters are large, body corporates and few in number;
(b) most water users are supplied by organized service providers; and
(c) capital accumulation in terms of infrastructure creation is already high.
In contrast, IWRM-style demand management reforms would fail to stick where:
(a) most of the country’s households are primary water diverters; (b) most selfsupply their water requirements directly from a natural source; and (c) capital accumulation in water infrastructure is very low.
All in all, the IWRM paradigm neither responds to the priorities of the poor in
poor countries, nor does it resonate with their ground conditions which make implementing water pricing, reform of property rights, allocating water at basin level
work. The key factor often ignored is the number of primary diverters of water from
nature. In rich countries, these are often just a very small number of body corporates—water companies, utilities, municipalities, co-operatives—who serve the
water needs of all users that are no longer primary diverters. In low-income countries with high level of income inequality such as Brazil and South Africa, IWRM
works well in the rich, modern, formal segment of the water economy but can actually leave the poor worse off by destroying their traditional institutional arrangements while replacing them by poorly functioning modern ones. In most other low
income countries where a majority of users are obliged to self-provide their water
because of absent or poorly developed water infrastructure, IWRM deflects attention
of policy makers in these countries from what ought to be their key priority—which
is to deliver improved and better managed water infrastructure and services.
A core value of IWRM is people’s participation in water resources management:
its popular slogan ‘make water everybody’s business’ is illustrative. In reality, in countries like India, the fact that diverting water from natural water bodies is everybody’s
business makes IWRM impossible to implement. A condition necessary and sufficient
for effective implementation of IWRM type demand management is that diversion of

 
26

T. Shah and B. van Koppen

water from nature is the business of relatively few, large users and service providers
who can be brought within the ambit of public policy with relative ease.
Contrast the informal water economy of a typical Indian district with the highly
formalized water economy of a typical European country, such as say Switzerland
(Luis-Manso 2005). 70 % of Switzerland’s population is urban; the country is facing continuous reduction in industrial workers and farmers. 15–20 % of the Swiss
population was linked to public water supply as far back as in the eighteenth century, more than India’s is now; today, 98 % of the Swiss population is linked to
public water supply networks and 95 % is connected with waste-water treatment
facilities. At US$468, per capita water bill the Swiss pay annually is higher than the
per capita total income of Bangladesh. All its water users are served by a network
of municipal, corporate, co-operative water service providers. It has stringent laws
and regulations about water abstraction from any water body which can be done
only through formal concessions. However, these concessions are held only by a
small number of formal service providing public agencies; as a result, their enforcement entails little transaction costs. It is not surprising that IWRM instruments work
perfectly in such a highly formalized water economy.

2.5

Economic Development and the Organization of a Water
Economy

Water institutions that exist or can be externally catalyzed in a country depend,
besides several other factors, on the stage of formalization of its water economy
which in turn depends upon the overall economic evolution of that country.
Figure 2.1 presents a clutch of empirically verifiable hypotheses—a set of iron laws
of economic development3—about how the economic organization of a country’s
water economy metamorphoses in response to economic growth and the transformation of society that comes in its wake. Regardless of its water endowments, as a
low-income economy climbs up the economic ladder, the organization of its water
economy undergoes a transformation in tandem with the transformation of the society as a whole. The foremost driver of this transformation is urbanization and occupational diversification. As the proportion of rural and agrarian population declines,
agricultural water demand eases. With urbanization and economic growth, selfprovision of water is increasingly replaced by service providers. In poor economies,
implicit costs of water acquisition—in the form of labor spent in fetching water—
are high, especially for the poor; with economic growth, labor costs decline but
monetary cost of buying water service increases. In affluent countries, scientific and
economic resources devoted by the society per km3 of water diverted are much
higher than in poorer countries.
3

Scott Roselle used this phrase recently to refer to the unexceptionable tendency of agricultural
population ratios of countries to fall as their economies grow. But I think this also applies to other
responses to economic development as outlined in Fig. 2.1.

 
2

The Precept and Practice of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)…

27

Fig. 2.1 Transformation of informal water economies in response to overall economic growth

Along with these changes, water institutions too undergo profound change. In very
poor societies, self-provision of water by households is ubiquitous; in much of Africa,
we do not find local, informal markets even for pump irrigation service that are widespread in South Asia. Countries at somewhat higher level of economic growth witness
limited local specialization in water services provision in an informal manner. As
economies grow still further, local specialization—and informal institutions associated with these—disappear as large, professionally run corporates take over the role
of procurement, processing and retailing of water. Thus, the informal water institutions we find in India, Pakistan and Bangladesh—such as, say, pump irrigation markets, urban tanker water markets—are unlikely to be found in Australia or Spain
because those countries have outlived the need for these by creating specialized water
institutions at a higher level that their citizens need and can now afford. Likewise,
water institutions that are standard in industrialized countries—high net-worth water
companies managing a city’s water supply system—would not begin to work until
Dhaka as a water service market evolved, at least, to Manila’s or Jakarta’s level.4

4

If accounts of the travails facing global water companies like Vivendi and Thames Water who are
forced to wind up even in these increasingly affluent east- Asian cities is any guide, we must

 
28

T. Shah and B. van Koppen

For much the same reasons, it is difficult to find a country in say Sub-Saharan
Africa with a modern water industry of the kind we find in a European country.
South Africa may be the exception that proves this rule: white South Africa—inhabiting its towns or operating large, commercial farms in the countryside—is served
by what approximates a modern, formalized water sector. However, the former
homelands, where half of South Africans live, are served by a water economy even
more informal than India’s.
We have so far discussed IWRM paradigm’s errors of commission. However, its
major error of omission is that it offers no guidance on what to do with a plethora of
water institutions that developing countries already have. The here-and-now challenge of water governance in low-income countries like India is one of understanding and working with groundswells of spontaneous institutional formations which
have emerged and sustained to create value for water users. Informal, decentralized
pump irrigation markets today serve 1/3rd of India’s gross irrigated areas (Mukherji
2005), as much as the share of all public irrigation projects. There is a booming
culture fishery in the making in small common property ponds and tanks throughout
India providing livelihoods and improving nutrition of millions of rural households.
New technologies and stocking material created the potential for a boom; however,
it is the myriad changes that have occurred in the institutional arrangements for
leasing of small water bodies that have energized this boom. Where state governments dogmatically adhered to the communitarian ideal, the boom has remained
muted; where they have adopted an entrepreneur-friendly approach, the culture fishery economy has boomed. In the famous Sardar Sarovar Project on river Narmada,
planners had planned that the government would build lined minors going up to
each Village Service Area (VSA) commanding 200–600 ha; a WUA will build subminors and distribution network within each VSA by mobilizing local resources. As
it has turned out, planners proposed; and farmers have disposed. Of the 1100 odd
VSAs so far covered, not one has a WUA that built the distribution system. However,
this has not stopped irrigation in the SSP command; thousands of farmers have
invested in diesel pumps and rubber pipes; pump irrigation markets have sprung up
everywhere. According to some, this is certainly not the best solution; planners do
not like this irrigation anarchy; but then farmers do not like to lose precious farm
land and invest own funds for building a distribution system (Talati and Shah 2004).
Groundwater depletion is one of the most complex challenges India’s people and
water policy makers face. However, the responses of the IWRM theoreticians have
tended to differ from those of the people who are at the receiving end: the former
think primarily in terms of ways to reduce groundwater draft through laws and regulations; people have steered clear of demand restriction but have instead mobilized
local resources to increase supply. Rural communities in western India—notably,
Saurashtra and eastern Rajasthan—have taken to water harvesting and decentralized
groundwater recharge in a big way as a mass movement. In southern states, there is
growing tendency to convert irrigation tanks into percolation tanks by sealing the
conclude that South Asian cities have a long way to go before they can afford water supply systems
of European or North American quality (see, The Economist, August 15–21, 2004).

 
2

The Precept and Practice of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)…

29

sluice gates of tanks. In Gujarat, the government has been able to effectively regulate overall groundwater draft for irrigation, not by pricing groundwater and power,
or creating tradable water rights or making new groundwater laws, but by intelligent
rationing of farm power supply (Shah and Verma 2008; Shah et al. 2008).
Developing countries like India are then confronted with a policy dilemma of
whether to pursue an unachievable ideal—such as the IWRM—or to work with
what they have. Recent discussions in the field of New Institutional Economics
(NIE) help us to explore this dilemma because it addresses the question ‘why economies fail to undertake the appropriate activities if they had a high pay-off’ (North
1990). India’s water sector is replete with situations where appropriate activities can
potentially generate a high pay-off and yet fail to get undertaken. An institutional
change creates a ‘structure’ of pay-offs with gains varying across different groups
of agents, and therefore, inviting different ‘intensities’ of responses. A small group
of agents each threatened with large loss may put up a stiff resistance to a change
that is beneficial for the society as a whole, and vice versa. In NIE, transaction costs
are seen to include: (a) costs of search and information; (b) costs of negotiation,
bargaining and contracting; and (c) costs of policing and enforcement of contracts,
property rights, rules and laws. For a policy or institutional intervention, all these
three increase directly with the number of agents involved as well as the strength of
their preference for or against the intervention. All the three costs come into play in
determining the ‘implementation efficacy’ of an institutional intervention because
each depends on the number of agents involved in a transaction, which in an informal water economy is large.
A great deal of what policy makers and researchers consider desirable institutional change—such as making and enforcing groundwater regulation, metering
farm electricity connections, instituting participatory irrigation management,
reforming water rights all of which would be part of the IWRM package—are
extremely difficult to implement on the ground because the transaction costs of
doing so are high for implementers and pay-offs are low, even negative, for the
water users. In contrast, a plethora of institutional arrangements in the informal sector address various priorities of users, offering them high pay-offs and entailing low
transaction costs; yet the State is largely oblivious, even suspicious, of them.

2.6

Summary and Conclusion

The trouble with the ‘IWRM package’, and indeed the global water governance
debate as a whole, is its intent to transform, all at once, a predominantly informal
water economy into a predominantly formal one—something that would normally
be the result of a long process of economic growth and the transformation that
comes in its wake. In the IWRM discourse, formalizing informal water economies
is improving water governance. But evidence across the world suggests that there is
no shortcut for a poor society to morph its informal water economy into a formal
one; the process by which this happens is organically tied to wider processes of

 
30

T. Shah and B. van Koppen

economic growth. When countries try to force the pace of formalization, as they will
no doubt do, interventions come unstuck. Interventions are more likely to work if
they aim to improve the working of a water economy while it is informal.
Improving water governance worldwide is a work in progress. Countries like the
United States, Spain, Australia, and Mexico struggled with orderly governance of
their agricultural groundwater economies for decades before developing countries
like India have had to worry about these problems. And their experience is valuable
capital from which the latter societies can draw important lessons. The pioneer
countries’ experience does not offer readily applicable solutions, given developing
countries’ early stage of economic growth, vast number of small, dispersed water
abstractors, and a highly informal, atomistic irrigation economies. The solutions
would work in portions of water economies, such as urban areas and industrial sectors, that are already formal or easy to formalize. Here, water pricing and regulation
must certainly be the way to go. But in a diffuse, atomistic irrigation economy, more
inventive approaches are called for. The lesson that developing countries need to
draw from the pioneer countries is the value of actively engaging with the expanding but unregulated atomistic irrigation economy.
Three distinctive aspects set India’s water economy apart from the pioneer countries. First is the transaction costs, with millions of dispersed users directly withdrawing water from nature. Using pricing, tradable water rights, or even policing
and administrative regulation here is infinitely more difficult in logistical terms than
in most other countries.
Second is the agrarian poverty aspect. Over the past three decades, small-holder
irrigation based on groundwater revolution has provided more relief—if not a lasting solution—to millions of the region’s agrarian poor than most public policies and
programs (Shah 2009). Until population pressure on agriculture eases, public policy
will involve tightrope walking to balance conflicting objectives. The government
will simultaneously persist with the power subsidies responsible for groundwater
depletion and implement watershed development intended to recharge aquifers.
This apparent incoherence is symptomatic of the dilemma of water governance in
India. Efforts to cope with or alleviate depletion through supply-side strategies will
tend to be preferred over aggressive demand-side strategies that threaten
livelihoods.
Finally, the large numbers of dispersed users over a vast countryside present not
only a constraint but also a great opportunity for land and water care that sparsely
populated countries do not have. The institutional environment here can often
achieve more by joining forces with farming communities and institutional arrangements than by taking a command-and-control position. Rogers and Hall (2003: 10)
ask, “can the state steer the society?” In most developing countries “which typically
have a strong society and a weak state,” the challenge of steering lies in the state’s
making common cause with the multitudes. The mass-based groundwater recharge
movement in Saurashtra is but one example of what the state can do in partnership
with people. The trouble with regulatory zeal is that it puts the institutional environment and the people in rivalrous relationships when they should be
comrades-in-arms.

 
2

The Precept and Practice of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)…

31

Bearing the experiences of the pioneer countries in mind, India needs to look
within to find ways of turning Prisoner’s Dilemma outcomes in Coase outcomes. In
so doing, they can derive useful guidance from the original IWRM philosophy—
which emphasized participation and dialectics, enjoined societies to move from a
resource development to resource management, highlighted the insight that a natural resource cannot long remain both scarce and free, and encouraged a process for
evolving water governance structures tailored to the local context. By so doing,
India may not tame the anarchy in its water economy, but it can achieve a better
compromise between its conflicting priorities—providing succor to its agrarian
poor, and protecting its natural resources and environment.
Finally, the IWRM paradigm must not be allowed to obfuscate India’s key priorities for years to come, which is making good, sensible investments in improving
water infrastructure and services; and making these investments work. We also need
to bear in mind that as the world’s largest user of groundwater, India’s water economy has a unique dynamic of its own which demands a unique strategic response.
Finally, as India urbanizes and gets richer, highly formalized segments must emerge
especially in cities; direct demand management of the IWRM variety is the ideal
framework for managing these formal segments, and we should vigorously pursue
IWRM in these formal segments of our water economy.

References
Bandaragoda, D. J., & Firdousi, G. R. (1992). Institutional factors affecting irrigation performance in Pakistan: Research and policy priorities (IIMI country paper, Pakistan, No. 4).
Colombo: International Irrigation Management Institute.
Bhattarai, M., & Hammig, M. (2001). Institutions and the environmental Kuznet’s curve for deforestation: A cross-country analysis for Latin America, Africa and Asia. World Development,
29(6), 995–1010.
Biswas, A. K. (2004). Integrated water resources management: A reassessment. Water
International, 29(2), 248–256.
Cosgrove, W. J. (2003). Water resource sector in the coming decades: Global perspective. In
K. Prasad (Ed.), Water resources and sustainable development: Challenges of 21st century
(pp. 4–16). New Delhi: Shipra Publications.
Cosgrove, W. J., & Rijsberman, F. R. (2000). World water vision: Making water everybody’s business. London: Earth-scan Publications.
Cullis, J., & van Koppen, B. (2005). Applying the Gini-Coefficient to measure inequality in water
use in Olifants River water management area (Draft paper). Pretoria: Ninham Shand and
International Water Management Institute.
Fiege, E. L. (1990). Defining and estimating underground and informal economies, the new institutional economics approach. World Development, 18(7), 989–1002.
Frederiksen, H. D., & Vissia, R. J. (1998). Considerations in formulating the transfer of services
in the water sector. Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Gleick, P. H. (2002, July 25). Soft water paths. Nature, 418. www.nature.com/nature
Global Water Partnership. (2000). Integrated water resources management (TAC background
papers, No. 4, 67 pp). www.gwpforum.org/gwp/library/Tacno4.pdf. Accessed 22 Jul 2006.

 
32

T. Shah and B. van Koppen

Government of India. (2012). National water policy. New Delhi: Ministry of Water Resources.
http://mowr.gov.in/writereaddata/linkimages/DraftNWP2012_English9353289094.pdf .
Accessed 16 May 2013.
Holmes, P. R. (2000). Effective organizations for water management. Water Resources
Development, 16(1), 57–71.
Lawrence, P., Meigh, J., & Sullivan, C. (2003). The water poverty index: International comparisons (Keele economic research papers, 2003/18). Wallingford: Centre for Ecology and
Hydrology (CEH).
Londhe, A., Talati, J., Singh, L. K., Vilayasseril, M., Dhaunta, S., Rawlley, B., Ganapathy, K. K.,
& Mathew, R. P. (2004). Urban-Hinterland water transactions: A scoping study of six class I
Indian cities (IWMI Tata Water Policy Program working paper). Anand: IWMI.
Luis-Manso, P. (2005). Water institutions and management in Switzerland (MIR Report-2005-001).
College of Management of Technology. http://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/53568/files/CDM%20
WP%20-%20Water%20Switzerland. Accessed 15 Oct 2005.
Merrey, D. J. (1996). Institutional design principles for accountability in large irrigation systems
(IIMI research report, 8). Colombo: IIMI.
Molle, F. (2005). Irrigation and water policies in the mekong region: Current discourses and
practice. Paper presented at 4th IWMI-Tata Partners Meet, International Water Management
Institute, Anand, 24–26 Feb 2005.
Mukherji, A. (2005). The spread and extent of irrigation rental market in India, 1976–77 to 1997–
98: What does the national sample survey data Reveal? Paper presented at 4th IWMI-Tata
Partners Meet, International Water Management Institute, Anand, 24–26 Feb 2005.
National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO). (1999a). Drinking water, sanitation and hygiene in
India (National Sample Survey Organization, Report No. 449, 54th round, Jan–June 1998).
New Delhi: Government of India.
National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO). (1999b). Common property resources in India
(National Sample Survey Organization, Report No. 452 (54/31/4) 54th round, Jan–June 1998).
New Delhi: Government of India.
National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO). (2003). Report on village facilities (National
Sample Survey Organization, Report No. 487(58/3.1/1) 58th round, July–Dec 2002). New
Delhi: Government of India.
North, D. C. (1990). Institutions, institutional change, and economic performance. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Ohlsson, L., & Turton, A. R. (1999). The turning of a screw: Social resource scarcity as a bottleneck in adaptation to water scarcity (Occasional paper). London: SOAS Water Study Group.
Rogers, P., & Hall, A. W. (2003). Effective water governance (TEC background paper, 7).
Stockholm: Global Water Partnership.
Rosegrant, M., Kai, X., & Cline, S. (2002). World water and food to 2025. Washington, DC:
International Food Policy Research Institute.
Saleth, R. M. (2004). Strategic analysis of water institutions in India: Application of a new
research paradigm (IWMI research report, 79). Colombo: IWMI.
Saleth, R. M., & Dinar, A. (2004). The institutional economics of water: A cross-country analysis
of institutions and performance. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 398 pp.
Samad, M. (2005). The politics of water policy reforms in Sri Lanka. Paper presented at 4th IWMITata Partners Meet, International Water Management Institute, Anand, 24–26 Febr 2005.
Seckler, D., Barker, R., & Amarasinghe, A. (1999). Water scarcity in the twenty-first century.
International Journal of Water Resources Development, 15(1/2), 29–42.
Shah, T. (2009). Taming the anarchy: Groundwater governance in South Asia. Washington, DC:
Resources for the Future Press.
Shah, T., & van Koppen, B. (2005). Fitting water reforms to national context: A brief report on
African Law Workshop. Draft paper presented at Fourth Annual IWMI-TATA Partners Meet,
24–26 February, 2005, Anand, Gujarat002E

 
2

The Precept and Practice of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)…

33

Shah, T., & Verma, S. (2008). Co-management of electricity and groundwater: An assessment of
Gujarat’s Jyotirgram scheme. Economic and Political Weekly, 43(7), 59–66.
Shah, T., Bhatt, S., Shah, R. K., & Talati, J. (2008). Groundwater governance through electricity
supply management: Assessing an innovative intervention in Gujarat, western India.
Agricultural Water Management, 95(11), 1233–1242.
Sullivan, C., & Meigh, J. (2003). Considering the water poverty index in the context of poverty
alleviation. Water Pollution, 5(5–6), 513–528.
Talati, J., & Shah, T. (2004). Institutional vacuum in sardar sarovar project: Framing ‘rules-of-thegame’. Economic and Political Weekly, 39(31), 3504–3509.
The Economist. (2004, 15–21 August). Life is not easy for the three biggest private-sector water
firms.
The World Bank. (2005). Water resources, growth and development. Washington: The World
Bank, unpublished working paper for discussion (by David Grey and Claudia Sadoff).
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). (2000). Human development report 2000.
New York: Oxford University Press for UNDP. 290 pp.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). (2003). Millennium development goals: A
compact among nations to end human poverty. New York: Oxford University Press for UNDP.
Wolfe, S., & Brooks, D. B. (2003). Water scarcity: An alternative view and its implications for
policy and capacity building. Natural Resources Forum, 27(2), 99–107.

 
Chapter 3

Groundwater Depletion in India: Potential
of Alternative Approaches and Policy
Instruments
Nitin Bassi

Abstract Since the advent of green revolution in late 1960s, groundwater played an
important role in the agricultural and economic development of India. However,
large expansion in well irrigation due to policies of promoting private tube well
construction, rural electrification programme and subsidies on electricity and diesel
for agricultural use resulted in groundwater over-abstraction largely in northwestern, western and peninsular India. As most of the measures to regulate groundwater overuse in India have met with little success, this chapter examines the
viability of alternative institutional and economic instruments for sustainable
groundwater irrigation. Analysis suggests that the enforcement of private and tradable property rights in groundwater can bring about a significant increase in farm
outputs, with a reduction in the aggregate demand for water in agriculture. It will
also bring about more equitable access to, and control over, the water available from
groundwater for food production and thus ensure household-level food security.
This has to be complemented by the pro-rata pricing of electricity in the farming
sector, with improved quality and reliability of the supplied power.
Keywords India • Groundwater over-exploitation • Groundwater legislations •
Water rights • Energy pricing

3.1

Introduction

In India, groundwater has become a mainstay of rural economy supporting agricultural development and providing food security to millions of people. Following diffusion of green revolution technology in late 1960s, the area of irrigated cropland
using groundwater has expanded rapidly with farmers making extensive use of
N. Bassi (*)
Institute for Resource Analysis and Policy (IRAP),
B-137, First Floor, North-Ex Mall, Sector-9, Rohini, New Delhi 110085, India
e-mail: bassi43@gmail.com; nitinbassi@irapindia.org
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
V. Narain, A. Narayanamoorthy (eds.), Indian Water Policy
at the Crossroads: Resources, Technology and Reforms,
Global Issues in Water Policy 16, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-25184-4_3

35

 
N. Bassi

36

groundwater in irrigated agriculture. It came as no surprise that between 1993–1994
and 2006–2007, irrigation structures (dug wells and tubewells) pumping groundwater increased from 8.9 to 18.7 million. At present, groundwater nearly sustains 60 %
of the net irrigated area and about 2/3rd of irrigated food production depends on
irrigation from groundwater wells (Kumar 2007). Almost all major agricultural
states in India heavily depend on groundwater for irrigation. In Tamil Nadu,
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, and Gujarat,
groundwater caters to more than 60 % of the net irrigated area (CGWB 2006).
It has been estimated that crop yield in groundwater irrigated areas is higher by
one third to one half then those irrigated by surface sources (Dhawan 1995).
Productivity of groundwater irrigation is more than that of surface water because it is
reliable, available at the point of use, requires minimum conveyance infrastructure,
and has high application efficiency (Dhawan 1989). Thus in order to optimize crop
yields and maximize profits from agriculture, farmers intensively use groundwater.
Though it contributed significantly to agricultural and economic development of the
country, of late it has thrown many challenges for the management and governance of
this resource (Singh and Singh 2002). Overdraft of groundwater beyond the recharge
potential resulted in water scarcity across many regions in India. Out of 5842 number
of assessed administrative units, nearly 802 are over-exploited, 169 are critical, 523
are semi-critical and 4277 are safe.1 Further, 71 assessed units are completely Saline.2
In Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Punjab, Rajasthan and
Tamil Nadu, number of over-exploited and critical administrative units are significantly higher (i.e. more than 15 % of the total assessed units) (CGWB 2011).
With this context, this chapter discusses the extent of groundwater overexploitation in India, various existing institutional arrangement for groundwater management and the role of alternative approaches and policy instruments in promoting
sustainable use of groundwater for irrigation.

3.2

Extent of Groundwater Overexploitation in India

Groundwater use for irrigation in India has increased steadily and surpassed canal
irrigation in the early 1970s (Fig. 3.1). Since mid-1960s, it is actually energized
irrigation (through electric and diesel operated pumps) that has increased more.
Between 1961 and 2002, number of electric pumps increased from mere 0.2 to 10.3
million, and diesel pumps increased from 0.2 to 6.5 million. The expansion of energised irrigation is attributed to: (1) government programs to promote private tubewells, supported by soft loans to farmers and rural electrification (Scott and Sharma
2009); (2) the general shift to a flat rate electricity tariff for agricultural use in most
states (Janakarajan and Moench 2006; Scott and Sharma 2009); and (3) diesel
subsidy. Such ambitious interventions led to overdependence and overuse of
1

An administrative unit is categorized as: overexploited if the stage of groundwater development is
more than 100 %; critical if it is between 90 % and 100 %; semi-critical if it is between 70 % and
90 %; and safe if it is below 70 %.
2
Saline units are those where the entire assessment area is having poor quality groundwater.

 
3

Groundwater Depletion in India: Potential of Alternative Approaches and Policy…

37

Fig. 3.1 Source wise net irrigated area (Source: Author’s own analysis using data tables from
Indiastat)

groundwater for irrigation in many parts of the country. This resulted in declining
groundwater level, reduction in supply, saline water encroachment (Singh and Singh
2002; Narayanamoorthy 2010), drying of the springs and shallow aquifers, increased
cost of lifting, reduction in free flow and even local subsidence at some places
(Singh and Singh 2002). Lack of well-defined ownership rights in groundwater too
contributed to its unsustainable use.
As a consequence of overuse of groundwater for irrigation, 37 % of the total
assessed administrative units in Karnataka, 37 % of the total units in Tamil nadu, 49
% of total units in Haryana, 59 % of the total units in Rajasthan and 75 % of the total
units in Punjab were found to be overexploited (CGWB 2006). These figures are
much above the average figure (which is 15 %) of the country’s total overexploited
administrative units. However, it is argued that the current assessment of groundwater
over-exploitation did not provide a clear picture of the actual extent of over-exploitation
in both absolute and relative terms. It tends to underestimate the magnitude of groundwater overexploitation in India, which can be assessed from the negative social, economic and ecological consequences of over-development (Kumar and Singh 2008).
From that perspective, many districts in Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil
Nadu could be actually over-exploited, though the official figures show that they fall
under “safe”, “semi-critical” or “critical” categories. The regions which have serious
problems are alluvial Punjab, both the hard and alluvial areas of Gujarat, and the hard
rock areas of Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh.
Nonetheless, large-scale overexploitation of the groundwater resource has serious consequences for the Indian subcontinent where hard rock (consolidated) formations cover almost 70 % of the total area. In these hard rock areas, mainly in
water scarce Western and Peninsular India, recharge of aquifers is comparatively
low and often occurs at places having fissure or cracks or weathering in the rock
formations. In general groundwater potential of hard rock areas is poor (Fig. 3.2),
though relatively high yields may be obtained in restricted locations under favorable

 
38

N. Bassi

Legend
Ground Water Potential (Yield Litres/sec)
>40 25-40 10-25 <10

Unconsolidated Formations
1-25 1-10
<1

1-5

Consolidated /Semi-Consolidated
Formations
Hilly Areas

Fig. 3.2 Ground water potential in different hydro-geological settings, India (Source: CGWB
2006)

circumstances of topography and rainfall (NIH 1999). Therefore any form of overexploitation seriously affects the groundwater availability and contributes to well
failures in these regions (Bassi 2011).
Over the years, though the total number of irrigation wells in the hard rock
regions has increased, there is a simultaneous increase in abandoned or failed wells
(Fig. 3.3). Further, in some states, increase in number of wells has not contributed to
corresponding increase in groundwater irrigated area. For example in Tamil Nadu,
it was found that with the increase in number of wells there is no major increase in
groundwater irrigated area after 1980s (Janakarajan and Moench 2006). Similarly,

 
Groundwater Depletion in India: Potential of Alternative Approaches and Policy…

00-01

1200000
600000

Andhra Pradesh

Madhya Pradesh

Maharashtra

Failed /
Abandoned

In Use

Failed /
Abandoned

Failed /
Abandoned

In Use

Failed /
Abandoned

0
In Use

No. of Irrigation Wells

93-94

39

1800000

In Use

3

Tamil Nadu

Fig. 3.3 Well failures in hard rock regions, India (Source: Author’s own analysis using data from
minor irrigation census and Indiastat)

in five districts of Madhya Pradesh namely Balghat, Chhindwara, Shahdol, Jhabua
and Betul, the average command area of energized wells was observed to be declining almost consistently after mid 1970s (Kumar 2007). On the other side there are
areas in the Gangetic river basin, mostly comprising alluvial aquifers in Bihar and
West Bengal, with comparatively less development of groundwater resources (39 %
and 42 % respectively). The reasons are: (1) small and fragmented land holdings; (2)
low number of water extraction mechanisms; (3) high cost of energy; and (4) low
investment capacity of small and marginal farmers (Sharma et al. 2008). Along with
economic water scarcity, these are the areas which also face scarcity of arable land.
As a result, development of groundwater for irrigation and overall agricultural
growth is very low in this water rich eastern part of India (Kumar et al. 2011).

3.3

Institutional Arrangements for Groundwater
Management in India

In context of groundwater management, institutional arrangements include formal
laws dealing with groundwater, irrigation laws and their regulations, and informal
norms regarding groundwater development and use (Kemper 2007). Some past
legal attempts include Bombay Irrigation (Gujarat Amendment) Act of 1976 (on
well depth restriction), Pondicherry Groundwater (Control and Regulation) Act of
2002 (on well spacing restriction) and Andhra Pradesh Water, Land, and Trees Act
of 2002 (dealing with well registration and ban on well construction in notified villages). More recent is the Maharashtra Groundwater (Management and Development)
Act 2009 which envisages several restrictions such as, ban on the construction of
wells; prohibition on groundwater pumping from the existing deep-wells (more

 
40

N. Bassi

than 60 m deep); stipulation on deep-wells users to follow the groundwater use plan
and crop plan.
In pursuance of these legislations, many direct and indirect measures were
adopted for groundwater management in India. These include: artificial recharge in
areas facing problems of overdraft; direct regulation of groundwater abstraction;
indirect regulations through well financing and other leverages; local management
of groundwater by user groups; and establishment of cooperative property rights in
groundwater. However, most of these measures have met with little success and
have been ineffective in arresting groundwater depletion (Janakarajan 2002; Kumar
2005). Moreover, the 1992 Model Groundwater Bill which advocates well permits,
water metering, and withdrawal limits has not been properly adopted by any state so
far (Saleth and Dinar 2000). But of late, direct institutional instruments; such as
establishment of water rights and effective enforcement of legislations, and indirect
economic instruments; such as power rationing (Scott and Shah 2004; Shah et al.
2008) and pro rata electricity pricing (Gupta 2002; Kumar 2005; Kumar et al. 2011),
for managing groundwater demand are being increasingly advocated.

3.4

Can Water Rights and Energy Pricing Emerge as Better
Options?

The spatial and temporal variation in both water availability and demand is very
high in India. In eastern regions, such as states of Bihar, Eastern Uttar Pradesh and
West Bengal, though water resources are abundant, irrigation demand is very low.
Further, problems of water logging due to rising groundwater levels caused by
flooding and excessive irrigation from canals are encountered (Shah 2001). On the
other hand, demand for water is extremely high in water scarce arid and semi-arid
regions of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, and Maharashtra, where groundwater is
the major source of water for all purposes. Pumping regulations in these areas facing overdevelopment problems through groundwater legislation, control of institutional financing for well development, and restrictions on power connections for
pumps have been ineffective (Janakarajan 2002; Kumar 2000).
It is argued that even an imperfect system of groundwater rights will have more
sustainable benefits than a most perfectly designed power tariff structure (Saleth
1997). Many other scholars in the past have also suggested establishment of property rights as a means to build institutional capability to ensure equity in allocation
and efficiency in use of water across sectors (Saleth 1994; Narain 1998; Kumar
2000). Other institutional mechanisms, such as groundwater legislations, to check
and control overdraft have fallen flat due to their social and political implications.
The issue of effective water rights is particularly important for irrigation water
which has significant implication for agricultural sustainability (Saleth 1994).
Scott and Shah (2004) claimed that strict rationing of power supply to agriculture
in India is having an unintended consequence of limiting the rate of groundwater
exploitation. Further based on power reforms in Gujarat, Shah et al. (2008) argued

 
3

Groundwater Depletion in India: Potential of Alternative Approaches and Policy…

41

that metering electricity use by tubewells and charging farmers at rates based on
power consumption is detrimental to the marginal and landless farmers who largely
depend on groundwater markets and hence, unlikely to happen in near future.
Therefore best intermediate strategy is to provide good quality rationed power but at
a common flat rate tariff to all tubewells regardless of whether metered or not
metered. Citing example from water rich eastern state of West Bengal, Mukherji
(2007) supported the view that high flat-rate electricity tariff encourages development of water markets whereby the water buyers, mostly small and marginal farmers,
benefit from access to irrigation. But these views do not hold true in case of western
and peninsular India which are water scarce and already facing increased problem of
groundwater depletion due to continuing subsidized energy regimes for groundwater
pumping. Researchers have indicated that energy rationing but without metering and
unit pricing have failed to motivate farmers to use water and electricity efficiently
(IRAP 2010). For instance, in Gujarat where Jyotigram scheme of rationalized power
supply to farm sector was launched during 2003–2006, agricultural power consumption has actually increased from 9,571 million units in 2002–2003 to 11,009 million
units in 2006–2007 (Data Source: Gujarat Electricity Board). Whereas, Kumar
(2005) showed that unit pricing of electricity influences groundwater use efficiency
and productivity positively. In fact, Kumar et al. (2011) has provided empirical evidence that raising power tariffs in the farm sector to achieve efficiency and sustainability of groundwater use is both socially and economically viable.

3.5

Water Rights as an Instrument to Manage Groundwater

In India, groundwater property structure has remained relatively unchanged since
colonial era (Aguilar 2011). Based on the ‘dominant heritage’ principle implied in
the Transfer of Property Act IV of 1882, the Easement Act of 1882 deems groundwater to be an easement connected to the land and grants landowners an unrestricted
right to use the groundwater below the land (Saleth 2010). Since the land and well
ownership is heavily skewed, there is an inherent inequality in access to groundwater (Kumar 2007). A formal system of water rights can mitigate this inequity in
groundwater access and can also promote its sustainable use (Rosegrant and
Binswanger 1994; Saleth 1994).
Over-exploitation occurs when users ignore the effects of their actions on the
resource and other users when pursuing their own self interests (Johansson et al.
2002). For instance, in Gujarat, where there are well developed informal groundwater markets, water is sold without considering the limits of the resource. Though the
allocation of purchased water may be more efficient than in absence of such markets, the groundwater level is nevertheless being drawn down (Kemper 2007).
Under such scenario, absence of well-defined private property rights can be a major
source of uncertainty about the negative environmental impacts of resource use,
leading to its unsustainable use (Pearce and Warford 1993; Kay et al. 1997; Kumar
2003). Once the resource becomes scarce, well defined groundwater use rights can
become a key mechanism to control over-abstraction (Kemper 2007). Saleth (1994)
notes that the more robust, though politically and administratively harder, options

 
42

N. Bassi

such as the institution of a water rights regime could effectively limit and regulate
both individual and collective water withdrawal and use from sub-surface sources.
Well-defined groundwater use rights entitle individual users to an abstraction allocation at a certain point in time (Kemper 2007). However, the water rights administrative agency has to ensure that water rights granted will not result in annual
pumping quantities that exceed safe yield (Peck 2003).
If the rights are allocated only to use water, it can create incentives to use it even
when there is no good use of it. Therefore, water rights have to be tradable (Frederick
1993). Also, transferability and exchangeability of water rights are crucial to capture and reflect the scarcity value of water through price signal and guide water
allocation accordingly (Saleth 1994). Well-defined tradable rights (especially in
context of developing countries) formalize and secure the existing water rights
enjoyed by water users; economize on transactions costs; induce water users to
consider the full opportunity cost of water; and provide incentives for water users to
internalize and reduce many of the negative externalities inherent in irrigation
(Rosegrant and Binswanger 1994). Thus, the highest value of water use is taken into
account and provides an incentive to users for more efficient use and reallocation of
surplus water to a higher valued use (Kumar 2003; Kemper 2007). Empirical evidences from the functioning of groundwater irrigation institutions in north Gujarat
show that under a system of fixed volumetric water use rights, farmers prefer to
grow mustard, which is less water intensive, in larger area as compared to wheat,
though the earlier one has much lower land use productivity than wheat, but getting
same water use productivity (Kumar 2000, 2005). Further, volumetric pricing of
water and its rationing as found in the shareholders of tube-well partnerships, farmers allocate their entitlements for growing crops that give higher economic returns
from every unit of water used for crop production (Kumar 2005). But for a tradable
groundwater use right to resolve overexploitation of groundwater aquifers, a definite proportion of the aquifer volume needs to be reserved to achieve a certain stabilization (Kemper 2007) on sustainable yield considerations (Kumar 2005).
Further, there is a need to separate rights to groundwater from right to land as it
has constrained the potential for inter-sectoral allocation. Considering that agricultural use accounts for more than 80 % of water use, the modest transfer of water from
agriculture could meet growing urban and industrial demands. As evident from other
parts of the world, the infrastructure required for such inter-sectoral water transfers
would cost much less than the large hydraulic infrastructures planned to meet growing water demand for domestic and industrial uses (Mohanty and Gupta 2002).

3.6

Pricing Energy for Limiting Groundwater Use

It is a common knowledge that users have an incentive to use a resource more efficiently when it is priced appropriately (Kemper 2007). In case of groundwater,
energy pricing is important in developing economies like India where energy subsidies to agriculture are estimated between USD 1.9 billion and USD 6.5 billion per
year. Further, the electricity subsidies to agriculture in India are estimated to be 26

 
3

Groundwater Depletion in India: Potential of Alternative Approaches and Policy…

43

% of the gross fiscal deficit. These range from 80 % in Madhya Pradesh and Haryana
to 50 % in Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Karnataka, and to about 40 % in Rajasthan,
Punjab and Tamil Nadu (Bhatia 2005). These are also the states which are experiencing tremendous groundwater over-abstraction for irrigation. Hence, the ‘pro
poor’ subsidies regime has affected both groundwater situation and the state finances
alike; and has already turned ‘anti-poor’ in several regions of Peninsular and Western
India where the aquifers are already over-exploited and only the rich and large farm
owners can afford to abstract water.
Earlier, many researchers have suggested rational pricing of electricity as a
potential fiscal tool for sustainable groundwater use in India (Moench 1995; Saleth
1997; Kumar 2005; Kumar et al. 2011). Many argue that a flat rate based pricing
structure in the farm sector creates an incentive for farmers to over-extract it, as the
marginal cost of extraction is zero (Kumar 2005). Some researchers have argued that
since the price at which groundwater is traded in regions like north Gujarat reflect
the scarcity value of the resource, tariff hike would not have significant impact on
groundwater use (Mohanty and Ebrahim 1995). However, such arguments are contested on the ground that the actual annual demand for irrigation services in hourly
terms is much smaller in comparison to the total amount of groundwater the well
owners can pump out during a year and that they are not confronted with the opportunity cost of using excess water for irrigating their own fields (Kumar and Singh
2001). Nevertheless, some scholars continue to advocate that the flat tariff regime
with power supply rationing and supply management is the highly rationale, sophisticated and scientific pricing regime (Shah et al. 2007). But field studies suggest that
power rationing with good quality supply but without metering and unit pricing has
failed to arrest groundwater over-exploitation (IRAP 2010).
It is quite true that the policies with regard to water and electricity pricing are
guided by strong political and economic considerations (Moench 1995). Once a
subsidized regime is set, it is politically very difficult to return to energy prices that
actually reflect the cost of energy to state (Kemper 2007). But the recent past has
seen some remarkable success in introducing metering, and charging a power tariff
based on actual consumption in some states. These include West Bengal (Mukherji
et al. 2009), Uttarakhand (Bassi et al. 2007), and Gujarat (Kumar et al. 2011). In
many Indian states farmers have been crying foul over the deteriorating power supply, which is free or highly subsidized, and instead were demanding a good quality
power supply with a price. A field research study undertaken in Madhya Pradesh
confirmed that it is actually small and marginal farmers who have been affected
most by the subsidized power driven groundwater overexploitation as they have
limited resources and access to groundwater (Bassi et al. 2008). It was further analysed that the aggregate net returns per farmer for small landholders were 41 % less
than the large landowners. Similarly, aggregate net returns per well for small landholders were 39 % less than the large landowners (Fig. 3.4).
Citing the case of the aquifers of the Lower Jordan River Basin, Venot and Molle
(2008) argued that any substantial increase in volumetric charges is unlikely to
enable regulation of groundwater abstraction and would further decrease the income
from low-value or extensive crops. They emphasized that significant reduction will

 
44

N. Bassi

100000.00

Small Landowners

Large Landowners

10000.00
1000.00
100.00
10.00
1.00
Mean no. of Mean Irrigated
Wells/farmer Area/Well (Ha.)

Mean Irrigated
Area/Well

Net Return/Well
Net Return/
(Rs./Ha.)
Farmer (Rs./Ha.)

Owner (Ha.)

Fig. 3.4 Well irrigation characteristics and returns, Bagli block, Madhya Pradesh (Author’s analysis of primary data)

only be achieved through policies that reduce the number of wells in use. However,
the empirical studies carried out so far on the issue of energy pricing on groundwater use in India show that the introduction of consumption-based pricing of electricity and an increase in unit charges, if combined with improvement in the quality of
power supply, will lead to greater agricultural income and a reduction in use of
groundwater (IRMA/UNICEF 2001; Kumar 2005; Kumar et al. 2011). Scott and
Shah (2004) held that a zero or flat-rate tariff provides no incentive to limit pumping; however, the increases in metered tariff required for elastic demand behaviour
are likely to be significantly higher than are acceptable to either farmers or politicians (also refer to de Fraiture and Perry 2002). However, empirical studies in North
Gujarat (Kumar 2005) and in South Bihar, Eastern UP and north Gujarat (Kumar
et al. 2011) established that the levels of pricing at which demand for electricity and
groundwater becomes elastic to tariff are socio-economically viable.
Some researchers have also questioned the feasibility of installing meters at such
a large scale because of the huge transaction cost involved in it (Shah et al. 2007).
However they were found to be rather excuses used by officials and other functionaries of electricity departments to cover up the revenue losses due to poor operational efficiencies, resulting from transmission losses and distribution losses,
including thefts (Kumar 2009). With the advent of pre-paid electronic meters which
work through scratch cards (Zekri 2008) and work on internet or mobile technology
and remotely-sensed meters (Kumar et al. 2011), the transaction cost of metering
can be minimized to a great extent. The use of remotely-sensed meters can also
avoid the huge transaction cost of metering. The technology used in these meters
enables them to be installed in places where tampering by farmers and meter readers
will be difficult, yet where readings can be easily obtained. This is now used for
measuring electricity consumption by agro wells in West Bengal (Mukherji et al.
2009).

 
3

Groundwater Depletion in India: Potential of Alternative Approaches and Policy…

45

But, such fiscal instruments are required in regions experiencing over-draft. In
India, overdraft appears to be occurring in regions which experience low to medium
rainfall with high aridity (Kumar and Singh 2008). Metering and pro rata pricing of
electricity may not be required in those regions which have abundant groundwater, if
the issue of cost recovery in electricity supply can be addressed through other modes
of pricing. The reason is that metering is essentially an economic decision and the
benefits of metering have to justify the efforts involved (Arghyam/IRAP 2010). In
water-abundant regions, the social and economic benefits of groundwater conservation
through metering may not be very significant. Therefore, in those regions, the pricing
structure should be designed in such a way that it encourages greater use of groundwater for boosting agricultural production. But caution should be exercised, to see that it
does not create negative effects on equity in distribution of energy subsidy benefits.
The flat system of pricing, based on the connected load of the pump set, can be a good
basis for pricing electricity in groundwater abundant areas (Kumar et al. 2011).

3.7

Conclusion and Policy Implication

The number of groundwater wells in India has almost doubled during the last two
decades. Further, incidence of well failures has been on rise especially in regions
characterized by poor specific yield and groundwater potential. These instances
give clear signs of aquifer depletion which requires some immediate solution.
However, existing state regulations concerning groundwater management have been
able to achieve little. Additionally, compliance with age old colonial laws and policy
of providing free or subsidized energy supply for irrigation use has resulted in overexploitation of aquifer and misuse of abstracted groundwater. Though started as a
pro-poor policy initiative, energy subsidies are quickly turning into pro-rich policy
initiatives by allowing resource rich farmers to continue more pumping.
Enforcement of private and tradable water rights in groundwater can together
bring about a significant increase in farm outputs, with a reduction in aggregate
demand for water in agriculture. It will also bring about more equitable access to,
and control over, the water available from groundwater for food production and
ensure household-level food security. In this formal regime, small farmers and the
poor will gain water rights, which would empower them, and can serve as additional
collateral (Mohanty and Gupta 2002). This has to be complemented by the pro rata
pricing of electricity in the farm sector, with improved quality and reliability of the
supplied power. Flat tariff regimes, whether rationed or managed, can do little to
control groundwater and energy use in agriculture. Therefore, metering and pro rata
pricing of electricity has to receive priority, especially in naturally water-scarce
regions which also experience groundwater over-draft. Whereas, in the groundwaterabundant eastern region of India, the pricing structure in the farming sector should
be designed in such a way that it encourages greater use of groundwater. However,
in such areas there is a limit to agricultural growth as availability of per capita arable
land becomes a constraint.

 
46

N. Bassi

References
Aguilar, D. (2011). Groundwater reform in India: An equity and sustainability dilemma. Texas
International Law Journal, 46(2010-11), 623–653.
Arghyam/IRAP (Institute for Resource Analysis and Policy). (2010). Developing a tool kit on
integrated urban water management in different urban typologies of India. Hyderabad: Institute
for Resource Analysis and Policy.
Bassi, N. (2011). Groundwater over-exploitation in hard rock regions of India. In M. D. Kumar
(Ed.), Sustainable groundwater management in semi-arid, hard rock areas of Maharashtra
(pp. 79–88). Pune: Groundwater Survey and Development Agency/UNICEF.
Bassi, N., Sharma, B. R., & Chauhan, B. S. (2007). Groundwater use for irrigation, Uttarakhand,
India. Paper presented at IWMI 2nd International Training and Research Course on
Groundwater Governance in Asia: Theory and Practice, IIT-Roorkee, 13 Nov–12 Dec 2007.
Bassi, N., Vijayshankar, P. S., & Kumar, M. D. (2008). Wells and ill-fare: Impacts of well failures
on cultivators in hard rock areas of Madhya Pradesh. In M. D. Kumar (Ed.), Managing water
in the face of growing scarcity, inequity and declining returns: Exploring fresh approaches
(Vol. I, pp. 318–330). Hyderabad: International Water Management Institute.
Bhatia, R. (2005). Water and energy. Background paper for the report. India’s water economy:
Bracing for a turbulent future. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
CGWB (Central Ground Water Board). (2006). Dynamic ground water resources of India.
Faridabad: Ministry of Water Resources, Government of India.
CGWB (Central Ground Water Board). (2011). Dynamic ground water resources of India.
Faridabad: Ministry of Water Resources, Government of India.
de Fraiture, C., & Perry, C. (2002). Why is irrigation water demand inelastic at low price ranges?
Paper presented at Irrigation Water Policies: Micro and Macro Considerations. Jointly organized by World Bank and Government of Morocco, Adigar, 15–17 June 2002.
Dhawan, B. D. (1989). Studies in irrigation and water management. New Delhi: Commonwealth
Publishers.
Dhawan, B. D. (1995). Groundwater depletion, land degradation and irrigated agriculture in
India. New Delhi: Commonwealth Publishers.
Frederick, K. D. (1993). Balancing water demand with supplies: The role of management in a
world of increasing scarcity (Technical paper, 189). Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Gupta, R. K. (2002). Water and energy linkages for groundwater exploitation: A case study of
Gujarat state, India. International Journal of Water Resources Development, 18(1), 25–45.
IRAP (Institute for Resource Analysis and Policy). (2010). Gujarat’s agricultural growth story:
Exploding some myths (Occasional paper, No. 2). Hyderabad: Institute for Resource Analysis
and Policy.
IRMA (Institute of Rural Management Anand)/UNICEF. (2001). White paper on water in Gujarat.
Report submitted to the Government of Gujarat, Gandhinagar.
Janakarajan, S. (2002). Wells and illfare: An overview of groundwater use and abuse in Tamil
Nadu, south India. Paper presented at the 1st annual partners’ meet of the IWMI-Tata Water
Policy Research Program, Anand.
Janakarajan, S., & Moench, M. (2006). Are wells a potential threat to farmers’ well being? Case of
deteriorating groundwater irrigation in Tamil Nadu. Economic and Political Weekly, 41(37),
3977–3987.
Johansson, R. C., Tsur, Y., Roe, T. L., Doukkali, R., & Dinar, A. (2002). Pricing irrigation water: A
review of theory and practice. Water Policy, 4(2), 173–199.
Kay, M., Franks, T., & Smith, L. (1997). Water: Economics, management and demand. London: E
& FN Spon.
Kemper, K. E. (2007). Instruments and institutions for groundwater management. In M. Giordano
& K. Villholth (Eds.), The agricultural groundwater revolution: Opportunities and threats to
development (pp. 153–172). Wallingford: CABI Publishing.

 
3

Groundwater Depletion in India: Potential of Alternative Approaches and Policy…

47

Kumar, M. D. (2000). Institutional framework for managing groundwater: A case study of community organizations in Gujarat, India. Water Policy, 2(6), 423–432.
Kumar, M. D. (2003). Food security and sustainable agriculture: India’s water management challenge (Working paper, 60). Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Kumar, M. D. (2005). Impact of electricity prices and volumetric water allocation on energy and
groundwater demand management: Analysis from western India. Energy Policy, 33(1), 39–51.
Kumar, M. D. (2007). Groundwater management in India: Physical, institutional and policy alternatives. New Delhi: Sage.
Kumar, M. D. (2009). Opportunities and constraints to improving water productivity in India. In
M. D. Kumar & U. A. Amarasinghe (Eds.), Water productivity improvements in Indian agriculture: Potentials, constraints and prospects (pp. 121–152). Colombo: International Water
Management Institute.
Kumar, M. D., & Singh, O. P. (2001). Market instruments for demand management in the face of
scarcity and overuse of water in Gujarat, Western India. Water Policy, 3(5), 387–403.
Kumar, M. D., & Singh, O. P. (2008). How serious are groundwater over-exploitation problems in
India? A fresh investigation into an old issue. In M. D. Kumar (Ed.), Managing water in the
face of growing scarcity, inequity and declining returns: Exploring fresh approaches (Vol. I,
pp. 298–317). Hyderabad: International Water Management Institute.
Kumar, M. D., Scott, A. S., & Singh, O. P. (2011). Inducing the shift from flat-rate or free agricultural power to metered supply: Implications for groundwater depletion and power sector viability in India. Journal of Hydrology, 409(1–2), 382–394.
Moench, M. (Ed.). (1995). Electricity pricing: A tool for groundwater management in India?
Ahmedabad: VIKSAT-Natural Heritage Institute.
Mohanty, S., & Ebrahim, A. (1995). Energy pricing and groundwater use: A case study from
Junagadh district, Gujarat, India. Natural Resources Forum, 19(4), 321–330.
Mohanty, N., & Gupta, S. (2002). Breaking the gridlock in water reforms through water markets
(Working paper series). New Delhi: Julian L. Simon Centre for Policy Research, Liberty
Institute.
Mukherji, A. (2007). The energy-irrigation nexus and its impact on groundwater markets in eastern
Indo-Gangetic basin: Evidence from West Bengal, India. Energy Policy, 35(12), 6413–6430.
Mukherji, A., Das, B., Majumdar, N., Nayak, N. C., Sethi, R. R., & Sharma, B. R. (2009). Metering
of agricultural power supply in West Bengal, India: Who gains and who loses? Energy Policy,
37(12), 5530–5539.
National Institute of Hydrology (NIH). (1999). Hydrological problems of hard rock regions (a
state of art report) 1998–99. Roorkee: National Institute of Hydrology.
Narain, V. (1998). Towards a new groundwater institution for India. Water Policy, 1(3), 357–365.
Narayanamoorthy, A. (2010). India’s groundwater irrigation boom: Can it be sustained. Water
Policy, 12(4), 543–563.
Pearce, D. W., & Warford, J. J. (1993). World without end: Economics, environment, and sustainable development. London/New York: Oxford University Press.
Peck, J. C. (2003). Property rights in groundwater: Some lessons from the Kansas experience. The
Kansas Journal of Law and Public Policy, 12(3), 493–520.
Rosegrant, M. W., & Binswanger, H. P. (1994). Markets in tradable water rights: Potential for
efficiency gains in developing country water resource allocation. World Development, 22(11),
1613–1625.
Saleth, R. M. (1994). Towards a new water institution: Economics, law, and policy. Economic and
Political Weekly, 29(39), A147–A155.
Saleth, R. M. (1997). Power tariff policy for groundwater regulation: Efficiency, equity and sustainability. Artha Vijnana, 39(3), 312–322.
Saleth, R. M. (2010). Groundwater management in India: Legal, institutional, and policy framework. Note prepared for the IRAP training Program on Sustainable Groundwater Management
in Semi-Arid and Arid Regions of India, Institute for Rural Management Anand, 22–27 Mar.

 
48

N. Bassi

Saleth, R. M., & Dinar, A. (2000). Institutional changes in global water sector: Trends, patterns,
and implications. Water Policy, 2(3), 175–199.
Scott, C. A., & Shah, T. (2004). Groundwater overdraft reduction through agricultural energy policy: Insights from India and Mexico. International Journal of Water Resources Development,
20(2), 149–164.
Scott, C. A., & Sharma, B. (2009). Energy supply and the expansion of groundwater irrigation in
the Indus-Ganges Basin. International Journal of River Basin Management, 7(1), 1–6.
Shah, T. (2001). Wells and welfare in the Ganga basin: public policy and private initiative in eastern Uttar Pradesh, India (Research report 54). Colombo: International Water Management
Institute.
Shah, T., Scott, C., Kishore, A., & Sharma, A. (2007). Energy-irrigation nexus in South Asia:
Improving groundwater conservation and power sector viability. In M. Giordano & K. Villholth
(Eds.), The agricultural groundwater revolution: Opportunities and threats to development
(pp. 211–242). Wallingford: CABI Publishing.
Shah, T., Bhatt, S., Shah, R. K., & Talati, J. (2008). Groundwater governance through electricity
supply management: Assessing an innovative intervention in Gujarat, western India.
Agricultural Water Management, 95(11), 1233–1242.
Sharma, B., Mukherji, A., Chandra, R., Islam, A., Dass, B., & Ahmed, R. (2008). Groundwater
governance in the Indo-Gangetic basin: An interplay of hydrology and socio-ecology. In
Proceedings of the CGIAR challenge program on water & food 2nd international forum on
water and food, 10–14 November 2008 (Vol. 1, pp. 73–76). Addis Ababa.
Singh, D. K., & Singh, A. K. (2002). Groundwater situation in India: Problems and perspective.
International Journal of Water Resources Development, 18(4), 563–580.
Venot, J. P., & Molle, F. (2008). Groundwater depletion in the Jordan highlands: Can pricing policies regulate irrigation water use? Water Resources Management, 22(12), 1925–1941.
Zekri, S. (2008). Using economic incentives and regulations to reduce seawater intrusion in the
Batinah coastal area of Oman. Agricultural Water Management, 95(3), 243–252.

 
Chapter 4

Drinking Water Supply in India: Context
and Prospects
Aidan A. Cronin, Anjal Prakash, Praveena Sridhar, and Sue Coates
Abstract India has made significant progress in developing its water resources and
the supporting drinking water infrastructure. In fact, it has met the water target for
its MDG commitment and in doing so has contributed significantly to the global
achievement of this target. However, rapid development, increasing population and
variable resource distribution has led to the current demand for water outweighing
supply.
Large budgetary outlays since independence and a high political focus on drinking water have resulted in the country supplying water through improved sources to
92 % of its citizens. Improved sources, as per Joint Monitoring Program definitions,
do not reflect the safety of the water supplied. Also improved sources do not result
necessarily in improved health and nutrition outcomes due to other factors; the principal being poor sanitation and hygiene. This chapter will, therefore, deal with
water along with sanitation and hygiene.
Like any other basic service, to be delivered efficiently the institutions responsible for them play a crucial role. Clear delegation of responsibilities is essential
for this. This is not the case in India today with numerous institutions with duplicate roles and also significant gaps. In addition, inadequate institutional performance, lack of appetite for reforms and ineffective implementation of existing
provisions have affected the performance levels for water supply, in both the
rural and urban contexts. Besides the institutional challenges, other factors
affecting water supply in India include political will, environmental sustainability (including climate change), social dynamics, technological appropriateness
and economics.

A.A. Cronin (*) • S. Coates
UNICEF Indonesia, World trade Centre, Block 6 (10th Floor), Jalan Sundirman Kav, 31,
Jakarta 12920, Indonesia
e-mail: acronin@unicef.org; sjcoates@unicef.org
A. Prakash
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development, Kathmandu, Nepal
e-mail: Anjal.Prakash@icimod.org
P. Sridhar
Indian Water Sector, Mumbai, India
e-mail: praveenasridhar@gmail.com
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
V. Narain, A. Narayanamoorthy (eds.), Indian Water Policy
at the Crossroads: Resources, Technology and Reforms,
Global Issues in Water Policy 16, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-25184-4_4

49

 
50

A.A. Cronin et al.

In spite of a sizeable water resource base and vast land resource, India continues
to struggle to meet its drinking water requirements. This paper examines the landscape challenges and opportunities for improved drinking water supply in India.
Positive developments can be seen in the recommendations for the 12th Five Year
plan but will require systematic implementation of reforms and a strong political will.
Keywords Drinking water • Policy • Supply • India

4.1

Introduction

India has lost more than 600,000 children under 5 years in 2010 due to diarrhea and
pneumonia (UNICEF 2012a); almost 30 % of the global total. Water, sanitation and
hygiene (WASH) plays a critical role in combating these killers. Eighty-eight percent of diarrhea deaths are linked to incomplete water and sanitation service provision (Fewtrell et al. 2007). Stunting is thought to contribute to over a third of under
five deaths globally (UNICEF 2012b). India has the largest number of stunted children in the world with over 40 % moderately or severely underweight (NFHS-3
2006). Stunting depends on food intake, the general health status of the child and
the physical environment; WASH cross-cuts all these aspects and it has been estimated that 50 % of malnutrition is attributable to water, sanitation and hygiene
(Fewtrell et al. 2007). A recent study (WSP 2010) estimates that inadequate sanitation causes India ‘considerable economic losses’, equivalent to 6.4 % of India’s
gross domestic product (GDP) in 2006 (US$53.8 billion). These are all unacceptably high figures for a country of India’s standing and ambition.
India has about 16 % of the world’s population as compared to only 4 % of its
water resources. With the present population of more than 1.2 billion, the per capita
water availability is down to around 1,170 cu m/person/year (NIH 2010). Despite
these constraints, it is to India’s credit that the provision of safe drinking water has
taken great strides. India has contributed more than any other country to those gaining access to improved drinking water sources in the world, 522 million between
1990 and 2010 and has met the Millennium Development Goal for water (WHO/
UNICEF 2012). These numbers are commendable but when the data is looked at in
more detail, it is clear not all have benefitted equally. This is a key issue that has to
be addressed as equity has been highlighted in the 12th Five Year by the Planning
Commission of India (Planning Commission 2010, 2011).
Drinking water fits into the broader water sector. This sector is complex, interlinked and requires a holistic systems approach to develop a full understanding
ranging from political, environmental, social, institutional and economical
(UNICEF, FAO and SaciWATERs. 2013). This is true in all countries, but especially
with the competing interests and priorities at play in developing countries and middle income countries like India.
Given this need for a holistic approach, this chapter unpacks the challenges and
then develops the future possibilities. The chapter is divided into five sections. After

 
4 Drinking Water Supply in India: Context and Prospects

51

the introduction, Sect. 4.2 traces the history and institutional setting of drinking
water in India so that a clear picture of how the sector has evolved is conveyed.
Section 4.3 discusses the present institutional and service delivery structure of water
supply in India while Sect. 4.4 focuses on the present status of water supply and
sanitation. Section 4.5 maps the challenges of the sector in supplying water for all.

4.2

History of Indian Water Supply Policy
and Implementation

The journey of planned efforts in water supply and sanitation in India began in 1949
when the Environmental Sanitation Committee, Govt. of India, recommended a goal
of supplying safe water to 90 % of the country’s population over the next 40 years.
In 1950 the Constitution of India listed water as a State subject. Article 47 of the
Constitution conferred the duty of providing clean drinking water and improving
public health standards to the State Governments. This set the background for governing and managing water in the successive Five Year Plans. This evolution of
thinking and planning is grouped into four groups, called First to Fourth generation
programs (Sridhar 2012) and the corresponding milestones are illustrated in Fig. 4.1.
These generations of programs focus on rural water supply and sanitation. Urban
water supply scenario has been different from the rural in a way that the progression
of planning efforts as well as institutional structures shows a distinct trajectory.
Figure 4.2 illustrates developments in urban water supply over the years. The timeline of developments in both – rural and urban – water sectors is provided to suggest
a comprehensive way of looking at the developments in these areas rather than
examining separate programs in isolation. A wider temporal perspective offers context and insight into why a particular program was launched.

4.2.1

Rural Water Supply and Sanitation

First Generation Programs The first Five Year Plan (1951–1956) allocated
approximately 1.5 % of the total budget to water and sanitation. The allocation
remained roughly the same until 1969 when the National Rural Drinking Water
Supply Program (NRDWP), was launched, with technical support from UNICEF. The
effort mainly comprised drilling bore wells and building piped water infrastructure.
The fourth Five Year Plan (1969–1974) saw a near doubling of budgetary allocation.
During this plan the Accelerated Rural Water Supply Program (ARWSP) was
launched in 1972. This goal of this program was to increase the pace of drinking
water supply coverage which had grown at a sluggish pace until this time. ARWSP
made significant progress in the next decade, during which the budgetary allocation
to water and sanitation also peaked at 4.15 % under the Sixth Five Year Plan (Fig. 4.1).

 
Fig. 4.1 Timeline of rural drinking water supply and sanitation in India (Sridhar 2012)

52
A.A. Cronin et al.

 
Fig. 4.2 Timeline of urban drinking water supply and sanitation in India (Sridhar 2012)

4 Drinking Water Supply in India: Context and Prospects
53

 
54

A.A. Cronin et al.

Second Generation Programs A national level apex committee was setup in 1981
to define policies to guide India to provide access to safe water in all its villages.
This lead to formation of National Drinking Water Mission (NDWM) in 1986 followed by first National Water Policy in 1987 by the Ministry of Water Resources.
Additionally, a Technology Mission was launched in 1986–1987 in which appropriate technology intervention, water quality, human resource development and support were introduced in Rural Water Supply sector. The Technology Mission was
later renamed as Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission (RGNDWM) in
1991 (Fig. 4.1).
Third Generation Programs The National Water Policy was revised in 2002.
Villages that did not have adequate sources of safe water were prioritized and level
of service in partially covered villages was planned to be improved, under this revision. In the same year India committed to UN Millennium Development Goals to
halve by 2015 the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking
water and basic sanitation, from 1990 levels. The Swajaldhara program was
launched in 2002 which changed the way in which water and sanitation services
were supported in rural areas. Swajaldhara decentralized service delivery responsibility to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and users. This new approach advocated
for communities to be consulted and empowered in the planning process via a participatory approach; and from this to enter into a cost sharing agreement with the
local authorities. For the first time users agreed to pay an upfront tariff for water use,
that was significantly increased to cover the operation and maintenance costs.
Swajaldhara continued till 2009 when the National Rural Drinking Water Program
(NRDWP) was introduced. NRDWP drew on experiences from ARWSP and continues until now.
Fourth Generation The Rural Water Supply sector today appears remarkably different in its approach and prioritization of issues, in comparison to the earlier generations. A significant difference lies in the shift from top-down and technology
driven approaches to a decentralized one which lays greater emphasis on aspects like
sustainability, equity and community participation. Ensuring sustainability of water,
its availability in terms of pot ability, adequacy, convenience, affordability and equity
are given priority in the latest programs. All this is to be achieved while ensuring
decentralized approach which involves PRIs and community organizations.
As in other areas of governance the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments
were a landmark development in water sector. Now, with the amendments Panchayati
Raj Institutions were given the responsibility of providing drinking water. The
Department of Drinking Water Supply was renamed as Department of Drinking
Water and Sanitation in 2010, which was later upgraded into the Ministry of
Drinking Water and Sanitation (MDWS) in 2011. A dedicated Minster solely in
charge of MDWS was appointed in 2012.
Meanwhile, sanitation developed separately from drinking water, with the launch
of Central Rural Sanitation Program (CRSP) in 1986, though was planned and
implemented in conjugation with drinking water programs. By the 1990s although

 
4 Drinking Water Supply in India: Context and Prospects

55

progress was being made in water, sanitation coverage remained abysmally low. To
give increased impetus to progress and address known bottlenecks, in 1999 the Total
Sanitation Campaign (TSC) was launched. This program is a restructured version of
the CRS. TSC also included a component of building water and sanitation facilities
in schools. TSC evolved into Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) in 2012, with increased
household subsidy and linkage with the rural employment guarantee scheme.
It can be said that in rural water supply and sanitation the focus was on technology
until the lack of policy was felt. Policies affected a comprehensive approach to the
sector but the gaps remained unaddressed. These gaps included sanitation, community
engagement and increasing emphasis on demand over supply. Attempts to address
these over the two decades have been through restructuring of departments, decentralization of local level planning as well as responsibilities from the centre to the lower
levels of the democratic structure. More recently the importance of community
engagement, gender, flexibility in central funding along with increased financial outlays have helped raise the profile and priority of the sector, especially sanitation.

4.2.2

Urban Water Supply and Sanitation

About 32 % of Indian population is urban spread across 474 urban agglomerations
across the country, 31 of these have a population in excess of one million. Presently
97 % of population has access to improved water supply and 58 % has access to sanitation. Urban water supply was separated from rural water supply and given exclusive attention with the formation of Central Public Health and Environment
Engineering Organization (CPHEEO). This organization was to assist Ministry of
Urban Development in its functioning. CPHEEO began to conduct PHE trainings
specifically to produce professionals trained in water supply and sanitation. Sanitation
in urban context was seen in association with water but its introduction as a focus
area happened much later in rural context. To remove the practice of open defecation
and manual scavenging in urban areas Integrated Low Cost Sanitation (ILCS) was
introduced in 1980. Improvement of infrastructure to address basic needs of smaller
urban agglomerations and to avoid migration from smaller habitations to bigger habitations Integrated Development of Small and Medium Towns (IDSMT) was initiated
in 1978. But in spite of these programs little progress was made in the state of urban
water and sanitation. Part of the reason for this was allocation of funds. The rate of
urbanization over years was not proportional to the funds allocated to deal with water
and sanitation demand. The other reason was that the Urban Water Supply (UWSS)
did not have exclusive and targeted programs to attend to the requirements of water
and sanitation that emerged in the urban areas. The practice was to always club it
with larger urban programs in infrastructure and planning. Accelerated Urban Water
Supply and Sanitation Program (AUWSP) was an effort to give water and sanitation
a focused attention and Mega Cities Scheme was initiated to address the overall basic
needs of metros. Both IDSMT and AUWSP were subsumed into Urban Infrastructure
Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) and Jawaharlal

 
56

A.A. Cronin et al.

Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) with improved budgetary allocation and increased scope to schemes. These programs have helped introduce wide
ranging changes in planning, implementation as well as maintenance of water and
sanitation services in urban areas. But this has yet to achieve the scale of results
required; also due to the variety of structural challenges (administrative, political,
and social) that are constantly at play and affect the state of water and sanitation in
urban areas and which are further described below.

4.3

Water Supply Institutional Structure and Delivery
Mechanisms

Governing water resources and their use, along with servicing basic needs (drinking
water, sanitation and health) to over 1.2 billion people, requires an extensive system
of institutions at various levels aided by numerous special purpose agencies (Fig.
4.3). The federal structure of India requires that there is clarity in responsibilities at
Centre, State, and sub-State levels. It is important to understand the institutional
structure and related responsibilities to fully comprehend the water landscape and in
identifying the critical points in the decision making to implementation chain.

4.3.1

Rural Institutional Structure

The Central government is the facilitator of the entire process; its role is to set policy, guide investments in the sector, help States with funding, training, research,
quality monitoring and human resource development. Under the aegis of MDWS,
the National Scheme Sanctioning Committee (NSSC) sanctions funds to States. The
sanctioning process is closely monitored and heavy emphasis is placed on financial
expenditure. Impact of these funds is less closely scrutinized.
The States plan, design and execute water and sanitation programs. The State
governments are supported by various departments including Public Health
Engineering Department (PHED), Rural Development Department, Water Boards
and PRIs. It should be noted that States may have different institutional setups in
accordance with the local context. In some states water supply and sanitation
programs are supported by PHED, whereas in some it is the Panchayat and Rural
Development Department and in some it is the Rural Development Department. At
a lower level PRIs play a crucial role in the process as most of the implementation
and ground action takes place here. Going further, the PRIs are required to takeover
planning of the programs at the village level.
The highest sanitation authority at the State level is the State Water and Sanitation
Mission (SWSM) which is aided by a State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee
(SLSCC), Capacity and Community Development Unit (CCDU) and State Technical
Agency (STA). The Water Supply and Sanitation Organization (WSSO) works

 
Fig. 4.3 Institutional setup in the water and sanitation sector (Sridhar 2012)

4 Drinking Water Supply in India: Context and Prospects
57

 
58

A.A. Cronin et al.

under the SWSM (Fig. 4.2). WSSO provides software support to district and blocks
in areas like water quality monitoring, surveillance, evaluation, behavioral change
and capacity building activities. At the district level the District Water and Sanitation
Mission (DWSM) is constituted under the supervision and guidance of Zilla
Parishads. DWSM’s role is to facilitate communities (at the PRI level) to plan,
implement, operate and manage schemes in their areas. Similar to the support units
at state level, DWSM is also supported by District Support Unit (DSU) to fill in
technical knowhow and capacity building (Fig. 4.2). Key Resource Centers (KRCs)
provide capacity building on key technical areas from State to District level.
The Block Panchayats plays an intermediary role between DWSM and village.
In 2010 Block Resource Centers (BRC) were introduced to augment support at the
village level. BRCs provide continuous handholding to Gram Panchayats and village communities to achieve the goals that are set at the village level. Finally, at the
lowest level Village Water and Sanitation Committees (VWSC) operate. As the
entire system is decentralized, VWSCs should be independent units which make
decisions and plans according to their local context and requirements. The resource
and financial requirements are fed into the institutional system.
The system then works to meet these requirements and focus efforts towards
meeting the goals set by the Centre, State, District and the Village, ideally in consultation with each other. Achieving adequate WASH coverage is not possible independently and requires convergence. This implies that the agencies responsible for
planning, design and implementation must act in consultation with each other and
ensure coordination at field level. As previously outlined, access to drinking water
is determined by water availability and this issue spans several ministries. Water
Resources (surface and ground water) is governed by Ministry of Water Resources
(MoWR). In rural areas, monitoring of ground water is undertaken by the Central
Ground Water Board (CGWB). Ground water is replenished by watershed development programs in some states and watershed development falls under Ministry of
Agriculture and Cooperation’s purview (MoAC). The Water Quality Assessment
Authority (WQAA) is the responsibility of Ministry of Environment and Forest
(MoEF). These links imply that all these ministries have to be involved in the sustainable provision of drinking water. Several ministries besides MDWS, including
Ministry of Health and Family Affairs and Ministry of Women and Child
Development, are required to achieve universal access to safe sanitation and ensure
good health via adoption of best hygiene practices.

4.3.2

Urban Institutional Structure

Unlike rural water supply urban water supply does not have a clear organizational
structure. At the highest level, the responsibility of provisioning urban water supply
and sanitation services rests with the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD).
Ensuring these services for the urban poor is under the remit of the Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation. Other National Ministries that share

 
4 Drinking Water Supply in India: Context and Prospects

59

the responsibility and also contribute financially towards urban water and sanitation
are Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, and Ministry of Home
Affairs. Two other ministries that have a role to play in urban water and sanitation
are Ministry of Water Resources which allocates resources to meet urban demand
and Ministry of Environment and Forests, which also influences the decision on
utilization of the resources used to meet urban needs.
A coherent and comprehensive institutional structure to deliver water and sanitation services in urban areas is not evident, though the 74th Amendment of the Indian
Constitution intended to empower Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to deliver basic services required in their regions. As a part of this, Central Finance Commission was
set up through which finances are allocated to States to renew their urban localities
especially small and medium scale towns to contain migration to bigger cities.
Similarly, at the State level, State Finance Commission is advised by both
CPHEEO and technical advisory boards in allocating funds to ULBs. Further down
from this level to district and ULB, every state has its own structure to deliver services. In some states like Karnataka the State sets up engineering cells (Karnataka
Urban Water and Sanitation and Drainage Board) to advise ULBS to plan their
water and sanitation services. Likewise, Tamil Nadu has Tamil Nadu Water Supply
and Drainage Board that advises ULBs and also executes the services for them. In
municipalities like Rajkot, the municipality takes up the responsibility to plan and
implement the water and sanitation services. With these examples it should be noted
that overall there is no single, uniform structure that is followed by all urban agglomerations countrywide.
The 74th Amendment mandates a structure where the State Finance Corporation
provides funds to urban agglomerations through Metropolitan Planning Committee
and eventually to ULBs though it has been observed that this process is often not
followed by the states (Planning Commission 2001).

4.4
4.4.1

The Current Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation
Scenario in India
Rural

The Joint Monitoring Programme or JMP (WHO/UNICEF 2012) estimates that 97
% of urban areas and 90 % of rural areas in India have access to an improved source
of water (Fig. 4.4). JMP defines an improved drinking-water source is one that by
the nature of its construction adequately protects the source from outside contamination, in particular with faecal matter. Indeed, the global MDG for drinking water
has been met thanks to the considerable contribution of India.
However, access to improved drinking water quality does not take into account
the safety of the water supplied (Bain et al. 2012). Hence, this value of 92 % of the
population accessing improved water is impacted upon when the issue of water
quality is considered. Microbiological (principal health threats from bacteriological

 
60

A.A. Cronin et al.

Fig. 4.4 Drinking water provision in India 1990–2010 (WHO/UNICEF 2012)

and viral pathogens) and chemical contamination (Arsenic and Fluoride are the
main health concerns from geogenic pollution; anthropogenic pollution is also
severely impacting on water quality) has resulted in water sources posing serious
health problems, especially to the most vulnerable segments of the population.
Groundwater has traditionally been thought to be a safe source, especially from
microbiological contamination. A UNICEF study conducted across 60 districts of
India in 2007 found that from a total of 11,800 water sources tested 40 % were
non-compliant for bacteria testing parameters respectively (MDWS 2011a). Sanitary
surveillance, simple risk assessment forms filled out at water sources; indicate that
this comes, not surprisingly, from the high levels of open defecation and poor operation and maintenance. Fluoride has been detected across 188 Districts in 19 States
and Arsenic across 54 Districts in 8 States (MDWS 2011b). Needless to say, the
at-risk populations in both cases are in the millions.
Another key issue behind these statistics is that of who is gaining access
(Mudgerikar and Cronin 2012). Sixty-five percent of the richest quintile of India
have piped water on premises while it is only 2 % of the poorest quintile; in rural
areas 32 % of the richest quintile have piped water on premises while it is 1 % of the
poorest quintile (NFHS-3 2006). Scheduled Tribe (ST) household access to piped
water is lower than the India average (24 % as opposed to 44 %); the corresponding
value for Scheduled Castes (SCs) is 41 %. STs and SCs are also disproportionally
with lower access to sanitation than the Indian average (75 % and 63 % respectively
as compared to the national average of 50 % from Census 2011)..In terms of sanitation, though progress has been made India will miss the MDG target (Fig. 4.5).

 
4 Drinking Water Supply in India: Context and Prospects

61

Fig. 4.5 Sanitation provision in India 1990–2010 (WHO/UNICEF 2012)

4.4.2

Urban

India is rapidly urbanizing and now almost one third of the population lives in urban
areas. Associated with the rise in urbanization, WASH access for the urban poor is
an issue of concern. Although the 11th Five Year Plan (2007–2012) considered the
census slum population (42.6 million, 14.88 %), it is also mentioned in the document that ‘almost 30–40 percent of India’s urban population lives in slums’ (Planning
Commission 2008).
Water supply is not uniform across all cities or states. The average per capita
water supply for Class I cities of Tamil Nadu is 79.9 l and for Maharashtra, it is
310.09 l, whereas the average per capita per day water supply for Class II cities of
the state is 106.74 l. Among the Class II cities of Maharashtra, water supply ranges
between 34.5 LCPD in Malkapur to 464.94 LCPD in Anjangaon. Such variations
are common across all the cities and states of the country. One of the major reasons
for wide variation in per capita water supply is the poor management of the water
supply system. Levels of system losses through ‘unaccounted-for water’ or ‘nonrevenue water’ are often as high as 50 % in Indian cities and represent large financial
and environmental losses to cities and their economies. A study of four cities of
Madhya Pradesh revealed that this Non-Revenue Water (NRW) ranged between 31
% and 49 % in Bhopal, between 37 % and 43 % in Jabalpur, and between 36 % and
66 % in Gwalior; based on the study, city-specific water demand management strategies were developed to minimize water losses and to increase revenue for municipal corporations (UN-HABITAT 2006).

 
62

A.A. Cronin et al.

Discharge of untreated sewage is the most critical water polluting source for
surface and groundwater in India. Estimated sewage generation from Class I and
Class II cities is about 38,000 million l per day (80 % of the water supply) and only
31.5 % of the generated sewage can be treated per day on the basis of the installed
capacity. Estimated sewage generation by Class I cities is 35,558 MLD and sewage
treatment capacity is only 32 % of the total sewage generated. Estimated sewage
generation from Class II cities is about 2,697 MLD and the treatment capacity is
only 8 % of the generation. Thus, 70 % of untreated sewage from Class I cities and
92 % from Class II cities contaminates surface and groundwater on a daily basis.
Location is the deciding factor for source and availability of drinking water. It is
reported that 50.7 % of urban households have access to piped water supply at home
but access in non-slum and slum areas is 62.2 % and 18.5 % respectively.1 Further,
the disparity on the basis of tenure status is more severe and, generally, households
of the non-notified slums are totally deprived from piped water supply in a dwelling
unit (Fig. 4.6). The disparity in access to improved not shared (individual) toilet
facility between slum and non-slum households is clearly visible. Also clear is the
urban–rural sanitation divide, as well as social group disparities (Fig. 4.7).
In India, empirical observations indicate that there is a vicious cycle of relationship between the insecurity of housing tenure and access to basic services. Tenure
security is defined by housing conditions and employment status. In general, those
living in slums are considered as poor. But, among the slum dwellers, there is a
hierarchy of tenure security. Basic services such as housing, water and sanitation,
electricity, education, health and above all employment and access to credit also
play a vital role in the overall development and enhancement of quality of life of the
poor people living in slums. But, basic services, such as water and sanitation are not
available to the slum dwellers living in ‘illegal’ housing or what is called ‘slums
with insecure land tenure’. Hence, land tenure has a very significant link with access
to basic services and therefore poor and most needy are left out of the formal systems of water supply (Darshini and Shah 2009).

Fig. 4.6 Status of piped
water supply and sanitary
facility for urban poor and
non-poor

Sanitary Facility
Urban poor
Non-poor
Overall Urban

1

18.5

Piped Water

47.2
62.2
50.4

95.9
83.2

‘Key Indicators for Urban Poor in India’, available at http://www.uhrc.in/name-CmodsDownload-index-req-getit-lid-99.html (accessed 16 October 2011).

 
63

4 Drinking Water Supply in India: Context and Prospects
Fig. 4.7 Open defecation
rates (%) across scheduled
caste (SC), scheduled tribe
(ST) and the all-India
national average, analysed
from Census (2011)

100
75

80

Urban
Rural

82
67

60
40

26

24

13

20
0
SC

4.5

ST

All India

Challenges in Ensuring ‘Water for All’

The previous section showed that the present framework for managing water has not
yielded its desired policy outcomes in terms of supplying water to all and catering
to the needs of the poor and marginalized. Approaches on water seem isolated and
not integrated. Responsibilities for service delivery have been shifting to local bodies – urban local bodies (ULBs) and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). However,
most of the time, these local bodies are unable to manage due to paucity of manpower, and lack of awareness and understanding of planning a water resource development and management activity. In most states, institutions created for water
management at the community level are not accountable and therefore do not have
any legal identity. They also lack capacity in merging multiple programs and
schemes. The question therefore is this: What can be done to change the situation?
In this section we outline some of the challenges that need to be addressed in a
coordinated fashion to further the goal of supplying water for all.

4.5.1

Economic Challenges

It is also imperative to take into account that people cope with declining water availability in a variety of ways. A recent study of the costs of coping with inadequate
water supply in Delhi found that the true total costs of water supply are already
‘privatized’; on average, the private coping costs are Rs 262 per month (when capital costs are included) versus a monthly water bill of only Rs 141 per month (Misra
2005). Indeed, the provision of availing a consistent 24 × 7 supply to water at higher
cost might not appeal to the elite group which already has ensured supplies by
means of bore wells, water storage tanks or pumps. Managing this water scarcity
situation is an immense challenge due to the socio-economic set-up of the country.
Another study, a water balance study of municipal water supply conducted in four
cities of Madhya Pradesh (UN-HABITAT 2006) suggests that the available water
supplies theoretically translate into per capita availabilities ranging between 150
and 70 liters per capita per day (lpcd). But at the consumption end, the availability

 
64

A.A. Cronin et al.

remains low, due to substantial non-revenue water which is estimated to range
among cities between 28 % and 45 %. The study reveals that the present water supply problems can be attributed to lack of governance and inadequate monitoring
infrastructure rather than to scarcity of water resources. The financial and institutional assessments suggest that the reporting on revenue is inappropriate with poor
estimates of collection efficiency, revenue and expenditure and over reliance on the
government for financial support.
Competing uses also reflects in the economic domain. A key player with ever
increasing water demands is industry. Industries are a large promoter of economic
growth and as India strives to maintain and accelerate its impressive GDP growth,
the demand for water in the industrial sector is also bound to increase. India is the
tenth most industrialized country in the world with about 88 industrial clusters scattered across the country (CPCB 2009). Water is an integral component in industrial
infrastructure and hence its importance in sustaining the GDP cannot be undermined. As mentioned before, the industrial sector accounts for only 2 % withdrawal
of the total freshwater resources of the country. According to the projected water
demand for 2030, the demand from industry will quadruple to 196 BCM (13 %),
pushing overall demand growth close to 3 % per annum (Addams et al. 2009). An
analysis on water use in industry, making a case for the underestimation of water
use by the industries in India (CSE 2004) argues that water use efficiency in Indian
industries is significantly lower in comparison with other developing countries in
the world.

4.5.2

Political Challenges in Ensuring Water
as a Human Right

Water is an immensely political issue due to the nature of the resource. This resource
interacts with a highly inequitable society marked with class, caste and gender differentiation. Techno-managerial reforms in the water sector have been unable to
tackle the fundamental issues of inequity in water supply.2 In this light, the right to
water issue becomes important. India is now a signatory to the 2010 United Nations
(UN) declaration of water as a right. A rights-based approach to water means that
communities have the opportunity to participate in decision making on water-related
projects and plans, and have access to information concerning water, such as safe
hygiene practices and water quality data. Ensuring right to water means that the
obligation to guarantee that everyone has access to safe clean water rests with
governments.

2
Prakash and Sama (2006) document one such experience from Gujarat where water access is
intertwined with caste and gender relationships. The authors observed ‘that power structure and
social and economic hierarchy go hand in hand and unless the issue of resource inequity is tackled
through policy and advocacy means, the real issue will not be solved’.

 
4 Drinking Water Supply in India: Context and Prospects

65

All stakeholders, especially the state, market, community and civil society, are
critical to resolving the challenges faced in the water supply landscape in India
today. The prime role of the state is to formulate people-centric policies thus ensuring parity. Also, to bring in strong directives for those violate the existing laws and
regulations. The market is seen by many as a profit-making entity that may compromise on the issue of equity and sustainability. Under strong state regulations, markets do play a positive role in water service delivery, research and development, and
also water-related technological solutions. There is no single entity known as ‘the
community’ as it is divided by socio-economic class, caste, tribe, age, gender.
Models exist for the community’s self-regulation, which needs to be seen in an
overall framework of people-centered development with more political and financial powers for the community to implement water-related projects. The role of civil
society becomes important here as it helps community capacity building thus
enabling community members to manage resources in a decentralized resource
management framework. Their role in having a close watch on the water management process is also important for equitable water distribution and sustainable management of the resource.
Community involvement in a structured process is essential to achieve this, right
from the planning to implementation level (for example Biswas 2012). However,
the problem is twofold; on one side, the authorities lack planning, and the community, too, is not actively getting involved in water supply projects. Wherever the
gaps from both ends have been met, the water supply projects have been successful.
Other related issues are gaps in technical capacity at the level of the resource, delivery, distribution and O&M, lack of information about the policies and plans, and
political interference.

4.5.3

Environmental Challenge of Dealing with Water
Availability and Scarcity

With an estimated per capita availability of 1,588 cu m/capita/year (CWC 2010),
India does not fall under the category of a water scarce country per se, rather it can
be termed as a country under ‘water stress’.3 However, India faces a large gap
between current supply and projected demand, amounting to 50 % of demand or
754 BCM (Addams et al. 2009). Any analysis pertaining to water resource management in India would be futile without incorporating the spatial and temporal variations in the distribution of the resource. Erratic distribution of rainfall, results in to
floods and droughts in various areas of India. While theoretically it might be feasible
to divert water resources from surplus to deficit regions, the ecological sustainability

3

According to the UN an area experiences water stress when annual water supplies drop below
1,700 cubicmetres (cu m) per person. When annual water supplies drop below 1,000 cu m per
person, the population faces water scarcity, and below 500 cu m ‘absolute scarcity’.

 
66

A.A. Cronin et al.

and affordability of such an exercise puts constraints on its implementation. Even in
the areas where water is made available it is important to revisit the sustainability of
such supply by looking into service indicators and customer feedback rather than
mere technical supply indicators. Further, climate change is now become one of the
developmental challenges for nations across the world. Climate change has an altogether different connotation for a country like India due to its varied topography,
consisting of diverse bio-geographical features including forests, coasts, mountains,
mangroves, islands. Further, the dependence of people, especially the poor, on the
natural resource base also makes them more vulnerable to such changes. The Lower
Bhavani Project in Tamil Nadu, is a clear example, where the most significant
uncertainty factor is rainfall variability (UNWATER 2012). This has led to water
scarcity and a highly unpredictable situation for the farmers without canal supply to
endure and adapt to seasonal fluctuations in water availability.
Water pollution is adding to India’s water woes with almost 70 % of surface
water and an increasing percentage of groundwater being contaminated by biological as well as chemical, organic, inorganic and toxic pollutants (MoWR 2000). The
sources of such pollution include point sources such as industrial effluents and
domestic waste, and non-point sources such as agriculture. The health implications
of poor water quality are enormous, and water and sanitation related diseases are
responsible for 60 % of the environmental health burden in India (Planning
Commission 2008). Water quality is another major concern. The presence of pathogenic microorganisms in drinking water is an extremely important parameter of
water quality given the crucial role water plays in healthy lives. The world over,
unsafe drinking water, along with poor sanitation and hygiene, are the main contributors to an estimated four billion cases of diarrheal disease, causing more than
1.5 million deaths, primarily among children under 5 years of age (WHO 2011).
Surveys have estimated that over one third of rural ground water sources in India
may be microbiologically contaminated, much of this contamination is preventable
and proper operation and maintenance of water sources coupled with safe sanitation
practices (MDWS 2011a). Indeed, improving environmental sustainability of water
and energy was been cited as one of the top ten interventions that India needs to
accelerate growth, in order to reach its economic potential (Goldman Sachs 2008).
As is evident from the gap between sewage generation and sewage treatment capacities of major cities, there is an immediate need to build appropriate infrastructure.
There is legislation that addresses the prevention and control of pollution – for
example, the Water Prevention and Control of Pollution Act of 1974, Water Cess
Act of 1977 (amended in 1988 as the Water Prevention and Control of Pollution
Cess Act), and the umbrella legislation, the Environment (Protection) Act or EPA
(1986). Recently, the Right to Information (RTI) has also been used by activists and
people as a potent legislation to deal with discrepancies in the water sector. Although
the Indian government is working more proactively on the increasing threat of water
pollution, it will take very significant political will for these actions to translate into
concrete measures resulting in improved water quality.

 
4 Drinking Water Supply in India: Context and Prospects

4.5.4

67

The Challenges of Equity and Distribution
in Water Supply

One of the major constraints often cited for India in achieving developmental goals
is the pressure of an ever-increasing population; it has now reached over 1.21 billion
(Census 2011). The per capita water availability during this period has decreased
from 2,309 cu m in 1991 (Sharma and Bharat 2009) to 1,588 cu m in 2001 (CWC
2010). Considering the projected population growth in 2025, the per capita water
availability can further decrease to under 1,000 cu m. Despite the National Water
Policy (NWP) assigning the highest priority to drinking water, providing adequate
and safe drinking water to every household in the country remains an onerous task.
A projected 40 % of the population will be living in the urban areas by 2030 with
higher purchasing power. This will increase calorie intake putting greater pressure
on existing water resources. There exists a huge disparity between the water consumption patterns of the rich and the poor.4 Access to water is governed by power
relations in society with the poor often being differentially excluded from this process. The efforts to augment water supply and ‘manage the scarcity’ often concentrate on the technical and managerial aspects thereby reinforcing existing
inequalities. It is imperative to consider the relational aspect of water scarcity and
the differential consumption patterns as the scarcity experienced by a poor person
with reference to basic livelihood needs should not be clubbed with the luxury needs
of the urban rich.
Provision of water supply and sanitation for increased population in urban areas
and provision of infrastructure in peri-urban areas are some of the challenges faced
by the government. At the moment, the policies are either geared towards urban or
rural areas with different institutional setup for delivery of services. The peri-urban
areas in this case face greater challenge as they face the brunt of urbanization and
lose their water security to fulfill increasing urban demand for 24 × 7 water. In many
areas, tankers fetch water from peri-urban areas and supply them to urban domestic
and industrial use. Prakash (2012) documents the case of Hyderabad where tanker
economy is thriving at the cost of peri-urban water security. Due to large influx of
population mainly because of the expansion of the city as an Information Technology
(IT) hub, the peri-urban areas have been losing out on water access to the more
powerful urban population with high paying capacity. These areas are witnessing
change in two ways. First, they cater to the rising urban economic class that is ready
to pay for constant water supply through the sale of water fueled by an informal
water tanker economy. Second, peri-urban areas and their citizens are at the receiving end of the waste water produced by cities, and suffer the consequences in the
form of polluted rivers, industrial and domestic waste and a damaged urban ecosystem. This trend has led to immense water insecurities due to a combination of
4

A study by Water Aid in Delhi reveals that in one particular locality, ‘92 per cent of water supplied
goes to 20 per cent of population and the remaining 80 percent of population gets 8 per cent of the
total piped water supply’. See Water Aid (2006: 58).

 
68

A.A. Cronin et al.

issues –urban growth induced water scarcity; myopic planning that is not based on
available environmental resources; lack of recognition of community water rights
and lack of regulation for the protection of diminishing surface water resources.
The final key issue to be considered under social challenges is gender. Rural and
urban women of almost all age groups are engaged in collection of water for household needs, including water for livestock. Women balancing pots of water on their
heads while travelling vast stretches is a common sight in rural India, as is the serpentine line of women standing in queues in urban slums to collect water from a
single tap! Indeed, water collection is a responsibility that primarily rests on women.
The average distance travelled by women every single day in rural and peri-urban
India has been a subject of countless surveys, and the fact that this indeed affects
their overall health and decreases productive work hours is established in many
research studies.5 The girl child’s educational and overall self-development status
suffers a serious setback in a society where they are considered inferior to the male
child by getting involved in water collection and other household chores constrained
by water supply. Although the policy discourse has recognised this role of women,
it has not come without its own peril. Women’s role in government water schemes
has largely been reduced to water collectors while undermining their potential for
involving them in the decision-making process. As per the NRDWP guidelines, the
members in VWSC should be selected to represent various groups of society and
50 % of which should be women especially those belonging to SCs, STs and OBCs.
The efforts were made to involve more and more women in the programmes at a
policy level. However, in reality and on the ground, these provisions are hard to
implement because of strong gender bias. The technological interventions which do
not take into account the social, economic and familial constraints of a society with
respect to women, may lead to unfair outcomes for them.

4.5.5

Institutional Issues

India has a significant governance deficit when dealing with changing water scenarios. Severe water shortages have led to a growing number of conflicts between
users in the agricultural and industrial sectors, as also the domestic sector. The pressures and drivers that stem from demographic, socio-economic, industrialization
and urbanization processes could have been better dealt with, if there as a sharp
vision for governance of water. Governance of water is divided between the central
and state authorities, with categorization of rules and responsibilities, yet it is seen
that the overall sustainable vision for water development, conservation and management remains missing. There is a dire need for convergence of laws and legislations;
there exist too many laws and this in turn dilutes the water issue. The coordination
and synchronization between departments/implementers and regulators is fragmented leading to each department doing things without coordination with other
5

See, for example, Seaforth (2001).

 
4 Drinking Water Supply in India: Context and Prospects

69

departments, and sometime at cross purposes. The regulatory bodies have not been
strict in controlling, for example, appropriation of water bodies, industrial pollution.
Also, there is lack of data disaggregation and aggregation in important decision
making by the body involved in water planning. Data is generated by different bodies and is sometimes contradictory in nature. The importance of data and its input
into management and regulation have been stressed for the 12th Five Year Plan
(Shah 2013). Much stronger political will is equally essential in finding sustainable
solutions to water problems and reducing the current governance deficit in water
(UNICEF, FAO and SaciWATERs 2013).

4.6

Conclusions

Here we have traced the sector development in India, both in urban and rural areas,
and have outlined the issues currently holding back progress. India has had significant challenges to date in managing water. Emerging challenges such as climate
change are going to further transform the water management scenario rapidly. This
chapter shows that the present framework for managing water has not yielded its
desired policy outcomes in terms of supplying water to all and catering to the needs
of the poor and marginalized. Approaches on water seem isolated and not integrated. Responsibilities for service delivery have been shifting to local bodies –
urban local bodies or ULBs and PRIs. However, most of the time, these local bodies
are unable to manage due to paucity of manpower, and lack of awareness and understanding of planning a water resource development and management activity. In
most states, institutions created for water management at the community level are
not accountable and therefore do not have any legal identity. They also lack capacity
in merging multiple programmes and schemes. The question therefore is this: What
can be done to change the situation? Would treating water as a basic human right
change the way we look at water governance? While there is some recognition of
right to water in international human rights, as well as in the Indian constitution, at
the level of state legislation and policies in India, different dimensions of right to
water do not get much support. This is true even of cases like Maharashtra, where a
particular version of rights (for example, entitlement to water) has been put forward.
In addition, there has to be stronger disincentive for polluting the water source
which accentuates the scarcity situation while polluting freshwater resources. Thus,
infrastructure for waste water management needs urgent intervention. The structure
and mechanism for conflict resolution between the sector and states need urgent
attention. Unless these concerns are met, the right to water, even if it is guaranteed,
will not bring fundamental change in the way water is conserved, managed and
delivered.
Given the multiple problems that the water sector faces, it is necessary to re-think
the approach to planning and implementation of the water projects. Since water is
used for multiple purposes, involving potential users from the start of a project
should be made central to program implementation but it must be asked if the cur-

 
70

A.A. Cronin et al.

rent institutional set-up has the necessary manpower and skills to do this. The governance structure around water has undergone considerable change with a view to
be more participative rather than techno-centric, though there is considerable scope
for capitalizing still on this policy shift and this really is the key to sustainable services delivered with quality and equity.
Disclaimer The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of UNICEF, or the United Nations

References
Addams, L., Boccaletti, G., Kerlin, M., & Stuchtey, M. (2009). Charting our water future:
Economic frameworks to inform decision-making. World Bank. Available at: http://www.mckinsey.com/App_Media/Reports/Water/Charting_Our_Water_Future_Full_Report_001.pdf.
Accessed 2 Apr 2011.
Bain, R., Gundry, S., Wright, J., Yang, H., Pedley, S., & Bartram, J. (2012). Accounting for water
quality in monitoring access to safe drinking water as part of the millennium development
goals: Lessons from five countries. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 90, 228A–235A.
Biswas, A. (2012). A Framework for rural drinking water quality management: Collating experiences from the voluntary sector (Learning document issue, No. 3). Bengaluru: Arghyam.
CPCB. (2009). Comprehensive environmental assessment of industrial clusters. New Delhi:
Central Pollution Control Board, The Energy and Resources Institute Press.
CSE. (2004). Industrial water use: Overused, underrated. Centre for Science and Environment.
Available at: http://www.cseindia.org/dte-supplement/industry20040215/industry-index.htm.
Accessed 2 Feb 2011.
CWC. (2010). Water and related statistics. Water planning and projects wing. Central Water
Commission, Government of India. Available at: http://www.indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/
files/water%20and%20related%20statistics.pdf. Accessed 8 Mar 2010.
Darshini, M., & Shah, P. (2009, April). Tenure security and urban poverty. Social protection and
shelter. Newsletter 4.
Fewtrell, L., Prüss-Üstün, A., Bos, R., Gore, F., & Bartram, J. (2007). Water, sanitation and
hygiene: Quantifying the health impact at national and local levels in countries with incomplete water supply and sanitation coverage (Environmental burden of disease series, No. 15).
World Health Organization. ISBN: 978 92 4 159575 9, 71 pp.
Goldman Sachs. (2008). Ten things for India to achieve its 2050 potential (Global economics
paper, No. 169). Available at: http://www2.goldmansachs.com/our-thinking/brics/bricsreports-pdfs/ten-things-india.pdf. Accessed 28 Nov 2011.
MDWS. (2011a). Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation; No. w-11042/01/2011/water, letter
dated 2 Feb 2011.
MDWS. (2011b). Sourced from IMIS, Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation Government of
India, Nov 2011.
Misra. (2005) cited in World Bank. (2006). Inclusive growth and service delivery: Building on
India’s success. Available at: http://go.worldbank.org/ODEO1J4A50. Accessed 22 Dec 2010.
MoWR. (2000) cited in Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF). (2009). State of environment report, 2009. New Delhi: MoEF.
Mudgerikar, A., & Cronin, A. A. (2012). Review of the status of equity in WASH programming in
India. Paper prepared for the South Asia Sanitation and Hygiene Workshop, 31 Jan–2 Feb
2012. Rajendrapur, Bangladesh: Editors Kathleen Short, Carmen da Silva Wells, Ingeborg
Krukkert.

 
4 Drinking Water Supply in India: Context and Prospects

71

NFHS-3. (2006). National family health survey. New Delhi: Government of India.
NIH. (2010). Water resources of India. Roorkee: National Institute of Hydrology.
Planning Commission. (2001). Tenth five year plan document 2002–2007. Vol. II – Social policies
and programmes. New Delhi: Planning Commission, Government of India. Accessed at http://
planningcommission.nic.in/plans/planrel/fiveyr/10th/volume2/10th_vol2.pdf. Accessed 7 Oct
2013.
Planning Commission. (2008). Eleventh five year plan (2007–2012). New Delhi: Oxford University
Press.
Planning Commission. (2010). Mid-term appraisal of the 11th five year plan. Available at: http://
planningcommission.gov.in/plans/mta/11th_mta/MTA.html
Planning Commission. (2011). Faster, sustainable and more inclusive growth an approach to the
twelfth five year plan, (2012–17). New Delhi: Planning Commission, Government of India
Prakash, A. (2012). The peri-urban water security problématique: A case study of Hyderabad in
Southern India (Peri Urban Water Security, Discussion paper series, Paper No. 4). Secunderabad:
SaciWATERs.
Prakash, A., & Sama, R. K. (2006). Contending water uses: Social undercurrents in a water-scarce
village. Economical and Political Weekly, 41(7), 577–79.
Seaforth, W. (2001). Why water is a women’s issue. Habitat Debate, UNCHS Habitat, 7(1), p.7.
Shah, M. (2013, January 19). Water: Towards a paradigm shift in the twelfth plan. Economic &
Political Weekly, xlvii(3), 40–52
Sharma, D., & Bharat, A. (2009). Conceptualizing risk assessment framework for impacts of
climate change on water resources. Current Science, 96, 1044–1052.
Sridhar, P. (2012).WASH in India – Background and overview wash in India handbook. 71 pp.,
developed with UNICEF India.
UN-HABITAT. (2006). Water demand and management strategy and implementation plan. UNH
Report for Bhopal, Gwalior and Jabalpur, Water for Asian Cities Programme. New Delhi:
UN-Habitat.
UNICEF. (2012a). Pneumonia and diarrhoea: Tackling the deadliest diseases for the world’s
poorest children. ISBN: 978-92-806-4643-6, 86 pp.
UNICEF. (2012b). The state of the world’s children 2012: Children in an urban world. New York:
UNICEF.
UNICEF, FAO, & SaciWATERs. (2013). Water in India: Situation and prospects. 105 pp. Available
at: http://www.unicef.org/india/media_8098.htm. Accessed Apr 2013.
UNWATER. (2012). The United Nations world water development report 4: Managing water
under uncertainty and risk (Vol. 1). Available at: http://www.unesco.org/new/en/naturalsciences/environment/water/wwap/wwdr/wwdr4-2012/
WHO. (2011). Guidelines for drinking water quality (4th ed.). Geneva: World Health Organization.
Water Aid. (2006). Profiling informal city of Delhi: Policies, norms, institutions and scope of interventions. New Delhi: Water Aid India and Delhi Slum Dwellers Federation.
WHO/UNICEF. (2012). Joint Monitoring Programme for water supply and sanitation progress on
sanitation and drinking-water: 2012 update. ISBN: 978-92-806-4632-0.
WSP. (2010). The economic impact of inadequate sanitation In India. Water and Sanitation
Programme. Available at: http://www.wsp.Org/wsp/Sites/wsp.org/Files/Publications/wsp-esiIndia.pdf. Accessed 10 Apr 2014.

 
Chapter 5

Gender and Water in India: A Review
Seema Kulkarni

Abstract This chapter provides an overview of key issues in the area of gender and
water. It gives an overview of different debates around women and environment and
shows how these have shaped the discourse and practice around gender and water.
The chapter then goes on to discuss the reforms in the water sector at the global
level and how this has impacted the discussions around gender and water. A comprehensive review of literature is done in the context of India which covers the various writings and actions in the area of gender and water. The review specifically
looks at gender and equity issues in the areas of rivers, dams and displacement,
water for production and domestic water.
The chapter argues for going beyond the politics of representation and developing new agendas and creative forms of engagement with people’s movements- more
specifically women’s movements, farmers movements and unions working on the
question of growing informalisation of the economy, greater accumulation of capital, increasing injustices and disparities in everyday living- to see the linkages
between land, water, rivers, natural resources and livelihoods.
Keywords Ecofeminism • Gender • Domestic water • Water for production • Dams
and displacement

5.1

The Historical Context

The early 1970s witnessed a global environmental crisis with a model of limitless
growth at the cost of nature. This was increasingly being challenged with questions
around sustainable development raised by environmentalists the world over. Among
these were also strong feminist voices questioning the unsustainable paradigm
where women and mother earth were exploited. Eco-feminist thought primarily

S. Kulkarni (*)
Society for Promoting Participative Ecosystem Management (SOPPECOM),
16, Kale Park, Someshwarwadi Road, Pashan, Pune 411008, India
e-mail: seemakulkarni2@gmail.com
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
V. Narain, A. Narayanamoorthy (eds.), Indian Water Policy
at the Crossroads: Resources, Technology and Reforms,
Global Issues in Water Policy 16, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-25184-4_5

73

 
74

S. Kulkarni

developed as a response against destructive nuclear power, anti nature development
paradigms evolved as a powerful challenge in the first world context forcing debates
on zero growth development. In the developing world however the context was different and a zero growth model could not be conceived of in the midst of poverty.
Environments and their conservation had thus to be seen in the context of the millions who depended on nature for their survival.
Subsequently a large body of literature developed around the theme of Women,
environment and development both in the developed and developing world, primarily as a response to the crisis on nature and its people. Actions and writings around
these themes were a wakeup call for governments. The World Commission on
Environment and Development (WCED), better known as the Brundtland commission was set up in 1983, which came out with the report “Our Common Future”
(1987). This was followed by the Earth Summit in 1992 at Rio. The Summit marked
a new momentum in the women and environment debates. Since then there have
been several summits and conventions on issues related to sustainable
development.
In a sense 1992 can be considered as a marker for work around gender and water
emerging globally. Its roots of course lay in the rich body of work coming as a
response to environmental degradation, and the limitless growth in the first world
countries since the late 1970s and more so in the 1980s and 1990s. Deep Ecology,
social ecology, ecofeminism (Merchant 1983; Salleh 1990, 1991; Mies 1986; Mies
and Shiva 1993), political ecology (Blaikie 1985), feminist political ecology
(Rocheleau et al. 1996), feminist environmentalism (Agarwal 1992) etc contributed
significantly to literature and actions around gender and water.
Ecofeminist thinking however had a lasting impact on actions, programmes and
writings around gender and the environment. There is however no one single ecofeminism but several ecofeminisms broadly classified as cultural and social ecofeminism. Cultural ecofeminism has been critiqued for its biological determinism
which sees a close and inherent association between nature and women. Since the
survival of both is so intricately linked, women are seen as the nurturers and regenerators of nature. These positions drew heavy criticisms from social ecofeminists as
well as other feminists for essentialising both women and nature, for seeing them
without the complex web of relations in which they are bound with each other and
the larger society. Social ecofeminists or feminist environmentalists understood the
relationship between women and the environment as based in a material relationship. Women’s reproductive work of collecting fuel, fodder, water brings them in
close connection with the environment and hence their knowledge and experience
becomes crucial in the management and regeneration of nature. At a macro level the
work of Maria Mies (1986) is crucial as it looks at exploitation of nature, women’s
labour and other subsistence workers from the developing world as a systematic
process of entrenching new patriarchies and capitalist accumulation on a world
scale (Mies 1986).
What is important for us is how these debates informed the women and environment related actions and policies and vice versa. In the developing world contexts

 
5 Gender and Water in India: A Review

75

early actions and writings on gender and environment were framed within the oil
crisis of the early 1970s, the increased dependence on wood fuel and women’s
burden in collecting wood fuel. Women were thus seen as victims of this degradation facing the brunt of degrading forests, depleting water resources. Large scale
forestry programmes were planned to address this concern and by the 1980s there
was a realization that most of these had failed since there was no community participation; this understanding led to programmes being planned with communities participating in forestry management and community was understood as women
because of their close relationship to nature. The widely acclaimed Chipko movement from India in a sense changed the discourse with women being projected as
the protectors of forests hugging trees to save them. This significantly contributed
to the framing of women as the solutions to the problem of degrading environments
(Shiva 1989). Thus from victims women were now being viewed as solutions to the
crisis. Guha’s (1989) ethnographic work which traced the long history of the movement, its Gandhian tradition gave a different view to the Chipko movement by
pointing towards the shortcomings of an essentialist interpretation of Chipko which
ignored history.
Learnings from this body of work led to formulations which tried to locate the
environment and gender question within broader frameworks by addressing the
dynamic and complex relationship of nature, and genders, diversity and development (Agarwal 1992; Green et al. 1998; Jackson 1993; Rocheleau et al. 1996). The
backdrop of this discussion is important for us to locate work around gender and
water which was largely informed by these debates.

5.2

Global Policy Changes in Water

In Dublin in Ireland in January 1992 the International conference on water and
environment for the first time stressed the importance of women’s participation in
water management. Strangely it was the same conference which also clearly laid the
basis for commoditization of water. All of the four principles1 were accepted and
were recommended to the countries across the globe at the Rio Earth Summit held
later in the same year. Participation through decentralised planning and management and cost recovery through pricing were considered as important measures in
water management in the post Dublin era. It also marked a clear shift from a
1

The four principles Principle 1: Fresh water is a finite and vulnerable resource, essential to sustain
life, development and the environment.
Principle 2: Water development and management should be based on a participatory approach,
involving users, planners and policy-makers at all levels.
Principle 3: Women play a central part in the provision, management and safeguarding of water.
Principle 4: Water has an economic value in all its competing uses and should be recognized as an
economic good.

 
76

S. Kulkarni

technocentric approach to water management to one which recognized the need for
institutional restructuring and economic reform. Following this were the World
Water Forums since 1997. The first one was in Morocco, Marrakech in 1997 where
the main theme was to develop the “Vision for Water, Life and the Environment in
the 21st Century.” It was in the second world water forum held in 2000 at the Hague
that gender issues got firmly entrenched with the formation of the Gender and Water
Alliance or the GWA (genderwateralliance.org). International agencies acknowledged the need to involve men and women in planning for water (UNDP 2003). As
part of the Global Water Partnership formed in 1996, country water partnerships
were set up in different countries and many in South Asia had Women and Water
networks that emerged from the country partnerships. Much has happened since at
the global level in terms of recognizing water as a human rights issue on the one
hand and commoditizing it on the other, however gender remains a stated but unaddressed cause. The rhetoric on gender will remain a distant dream unless it is located
historically and understood as a set of complex relations between the different genders, defined identities and embedded in hegemonic power relations (cutting across
caste, class and race) that serve the interest of state, capital and patriarchy.

5.3

The Gender and Water Literature: An Overview

Much of the documented work on gender and water emerges in the post Dublin
period. A fall out of this was a spate of programmes designed to include women in
water management, largely at the micro level institutions planned around domestic
water. Most national and state governments brought in women’s participation in
their policy documents guided largely by agendas set by multilateral agencies.
Feminist writings approached the question by highlighting the contradictions
between recognizing women’s contribution as significant on the one hand and turning water into an economic good on the other (Cleaver and Elson 1995; Green and
Baden 1995; Zwarteveen 1998).
Framing women as being connected closely with nature and thus as privileged
knowers and placing undue burden of water management and conservation on
women drew heavy criticism from feminists. These critiques brought out the instrumental approach to women’s participation in water. They also pointed to flaws in
understanding women and communities as homogenous without addressing the
structures (caste, class, race and other differences), identities and discourses that
determine access to water (Ahmed 2005; Joshi and Fawcett 2005; Kulkarni et al.
2007; Rocheleau et al. 1996).They called for a more nuanced approach to understanding gender and water, locating it in the larger political ecology framework. In
a nutshell then, we have literature that supports the essentialist view of women’s
close association with nature and hence water and that which counters this view by
saying there is nothing inherent and essential in the association. Within the realm of
these debates policy makers and to a great extent uncritical practitioners continue to
understand women as instruments to address the water crisis, especially at the micro
level.

 
5 Gender and Water in India: A Review

77

It is indeed a difficult task to take complete stock of gender and water issues in
the Indian context in one article here. The first challenge is to organize the multifarious and overlapping writings on this topic in any compartments. But a broad categorization that seems useful for this particular review looks at writings and work
around (a) rivers, dams and displacement (b) domestic water and (c) water for production. Again these are not mutually exclusive categories but would help us unravel
the different meanings around water and its relation to gender. We already have two
good books, namely, ‘Flowing Upstream’, edited by Sara Ahmed (2005) and the
more recent one ‘Diverting the Flow’ edited by Zwarteveen et al. (2012) in the
Indian and South Asian context which are devoted to gender and water and they
become important references for those interested in this topic.
The second challenge is to bring readers to appreciate the rich and path breaking
work by feminists in unpacking the basic concepts of gender, sex, labour, social/
gender relations, division of labour, productive and reproductive labour, intersection
of gender with caste, class race and other forms of social and economic discrimination. Rather than going into an elucidation of this work here I would like the water
readers to refer to some basic writings on gender and patriarchy in the Indian context (Geetha 2002; Chakravarti 2006; Menon 2012; Mohanty 2004; Ghosh 2009)
that show that gender is a social construct that intersects with other hegemonic
structures like caste, class, race etc to create unequal power relations which greatly
disadvantage women especially so from disadvantaged social groups. It is an organising principle that creates identities which determine how we are perceived and
expected to think and act. Gender relations are thus social relations between the
different genders that reflect the distribution of power. They also determine the work
we do and the work that gets valued or not. Productive work is considered as valued
work, which creates surpluses and is largely done by men it is believed while reproductive work is largely unpaid work that is significant from the point of view of
subsistence and welfare of the household. Much of this work is done by women and
is not recognized as work and less still as work that contributes to accumulation of
capital. These images, symbols and meanings around gender and gender relations
get firmly entrenched and carried forward through institutions like family, marriage,
state, religion and markets for example. With this as a historical context we can now
see how and why gender mainstreaming in water is not only about changing water
policies but about bringing about a paradigmatic change in our understanding of
water and gender.

5.4

Rivers, Dams and Displacement

Rivers have several meanings in India; they are the source of life and livelihood and
have a strong religious and cultural meaning in people’s lives. In the Indian context
reference to rivers has often been as female. Feldhaus (1995) points out how waters
in rivers are attributed with feminine properties in folk as well as classical material
in rural Maharashtra as elsewhere in India. She points to not only the purifying

 
78

S. Kulkarni

powers of the rivers but also their fertilizing properties. Her work discusses the
folklore around rivers in Maharashtra, which she shows is linked to different goddesses of fertility and fecundity. They depict the different cycles of life i.e birth,
growth and death. Feldhaus gives several references from the Vedas that refer to
river in the feminine and describe the beauty, benevolence and the rage of the river.
Lahiri Dutt’s work also discusses through an ethnographic work on the Bengal
deltaic rivers how the images around rivers in these regions are constructed as feminine with qualities such as benevolence, nourishing and yet at the same time fearsome and frightening (Lahiri-Dutt 2006). She further goes on to show how natures
are constructed within ideological frameworks and the construction of feminine
rivers also reflects the gender relations within society that encompass love, hate and
fear of women. Lahiri’s work brings out the close relationship between the symbolism associated with nature and with women. She argues how this is used to the
disadvantage of subaltern groups in this case women, as an “anchoring platform” to
reproduce inequalities.
Shiva’s work for example in Staying Alive (1989) points out how irrigation
development, or damming rivers, to be more specific “violates cycles of life in rivers.” and leads to drought and women’s exploitation. She says “violence to the water
cycle is one of the worst but invisible form of violence …. destroying the feminine
principle and sustaining power of water and destroying women’s knowledge and
productivity in providing sustenance”.
This literature informed by cultural studies looks at water not as part of the physical environment but also very much part of our social and cultural lives. While one
strand tends to essentialise women by invoking the feminine principle the other uses
this imagery to show how these symbols are selectively used to power over women
and nature.
Construction of water scarcity and thus the justification for creating large dams
has been one of the critical areas of work in water. Displacement caused due to
submergence affects social and cultural lives of people in a significant way.
Literature around gendered dimensions of large dams has received very little attention, despite the fact that several anti dam protests have seen women in the lead.
Large dams change the entire landscape of a place by bringing in tenurial changes
and property ownerships. It changes the way informal arrangements in resource
sharing took place prior to the project. Women are most affected by these changes
as it puts them in vulnerable positions. They lose out on their status in the community and their bargaining power becoming more prone to abuse. Literature has also
shown how new formalized institutions in fact have a male character to them.
Interestingly women are at the forefront of these struggles, but do not seem to benefit very much from them in terms of addressing gender inequities. These struggles
however display the strong urge of women to change the course of dominant understandings around development (Mehta 2009; Lahiri-Dutt 2012). The Narmada
movement and the lesser known movements in South Maharashtra are testimony to
this. These are struggles against dispossession from land and water and the livelihood rights of people. But they also raise questions about the change that these
projects bring about in their lives in terms of the social and cultural meanings that
the rivers held for them.

 
5 Gender and Water in India: A Review

5.5

79

Domestic Water: Female Domain

Documented examples of water for domestic use abound in the literature around
gender and water. Several of these documented examples are also from regions
where there have been stronger NGOs or organisations working on women, SHGs
and rural livelihood issues. Women’s collectivisation around water for domestic use
stems from their role as providers of household care. Thus lack of water for drinking
and domestic use implies hardships for women in performing their role as providers
of care and nurture. We therefore find several examples where women have come
together and responded to crisis of domestic water in very creative ways, either
through engagement with the state, or through acquiring new skills in water harvesting, conservation, repair and maintenance and management. There are also examples of how women’s collectives have through participatory processes resolved the
water crisis of their villages. It may not be possible here to take stock of all the
examples around drinking and domestic water, simply because there are a large
number of such examples both documented and undocumented. For example noted
socialist leader from Mumbai, Mrunal Gore was fondly remembered as Paniwali bai
or water lady because she led several struggles for water, price rise and basic amenities in urban slums, and women were in the forefront of these struggles. As early as
1968 she fought for the right for water and other civic amenities for slum dwellers
in Mumbai (Gavankar 2003). Numerous such tales abound in history where women
have collectivised for water, largely to reduce their burdens of going through hardships to collect scarce water from long distances. Women’s struggles around domestic water need to be understood in the context of the established system of division
of labour where women’s work includes domestic work of caring, cleaning, fetching
water, fuel, fodder, cooking etc. or what is often referred to as reproductive labour
in feminist work. In fact gender and water often gets equated with women and
domestic water largely neglecting women’s work with productive water. For example women’s extensive labour in different stages of irrigated agriculture or use of
water for tanning and other village industries hardly gets accounted as work related
to water. Feminists have critiqued this division of water domains where domestic is
considered as the female domain and productive water as the male. The established
division of labour extends to the water sector as much as to any other dimension of
work (Zwarteveen 1995, 1998; Kulkarni et al. 2007). Productive water involves
commodity production, marketing and cash exchanges thereby giving an economic
value to water, whereas domestic water remains as a consumption resource with no
evident economic value. Feminists have pointed out that it is in fact these ‘domestic’
tasks of women that contribute to surplus generation and capital accumulation.
However this analysis has not been systematically applied in the context of water.
Some of the well documented and visible examples of work around gender and
water are those initiated by well established NGOs and organisations, such as
Utthan, SEWA and Tarun Bharat Sangh to name a few.
In the Bhal region of Gujarat which has scanty rainfall and saline groundwater,
women under the banner of Utthan formed a coalition called Mahiti and demanded
solutions for clean and adequate water. The Gujarat water supply board thus agreed

 
80

S. Kulkarni

to approving a project to promote decentralised rain water harvesting structures,
such as plastic lined ponds, roof top water collection tanks and similar such local
solutions to address the water problem (utthangujarat.org, accessed 11 june 2013).
Sewa trained its women members in hand pump repairs so that they are equipped to
deal with problems that arise due to failure of hand pumps. These trained women
not only work as barefoot water technicians but in turn have also trained several
women to deal with similar crises (Iyenger 2000; Ahmed 2000).
Tarun Bharat Sangh (TBS) in Rajasthan has been working for more than two
decades now on revival of traditional water structures in Rajasthan and the idea of
water parliaments has been a much acclaimed one. Increasingly TBS is engaging
with women through the establishment of Mahila Jal Biradaris which is a village
level collective that identifies the key reasons for the crisis and also looks for possible solutions for addressing it. Documented reports show that such processes have
contributed to addressing water scarcity and reducing the drudgery of women (Field
work discussions with TBS staff 2010).
In 2007 with a severe drought affecting the Bundelkhad region a local group
Parmarth mobilised rural dalit women through its informal initiatives of pani panchayat and jal sahelis with the aim of conserving traditional water bodies and preparing water conservation plans for some of the districts in this region. For dalit
women to come forward and challenge the caste ridden society, this was indeed a
challenge. With a network of 2000 women across 60 gram panchayats in three districts of Bundelkhand they have not only addressed the water question but importantly also challenged the caste and patriarchal order of society and established right
to water as a human right (Singh 2012).
These and many more examples from the rural context occurred in the post
1990s, which coincided with the Dublin principles of course, but also with increasing scarcity and mismanagement of water due to the extractive and iniquitous policies of the early 1970s especially with relation to ground water. All of these examples
challenged the mainstream thinking around women and water. Utthan’s experiment
is important from the point of view of women’s collectives being able to counter the
conventional wisdom of the water departments to invest in large centralised pipeline
projects which have not necessarily found answers to certain kinds of local problems such as this one. Both SEWA and TBS examples become important as they
challenge the static understanding around gender roles as providers of care and
nurture. While in SEWA women take on the role of technicians, which is otherwise
considered as a male domain, in TBS women analyse, think together and find solutions again understood to be a male trait and prerogative. In both cases women take
on new roles, challenge stereotypes and yet continue performing their old tasks as
well. New work simply gets added on. How do we understand these examples- as
using women as solutions to the problem and burdening them or as an opportunity
to discuss the age old feminist question of division of labour. Unfortunately most
gender and water interventions stop at the solution and do not use the space provided to challenge gender roles and division of labour thereby burdening the already
overburdened women. Much of the gender and water work as we can see remains
isolated from feminist politics despite the challenges it posed to water paradigm as
well as to gender stereotypes.

 
5 Gender and Water in India: A Review

5.6

81

Water for Production: The Male Domain

In the post 1980s reforms were being brought into public sector irrigation across the
globe. Poor uptake of irrigation, failure of the governments to maintain and sustain
irrigation systems both physically and financially were some of the evident triggers
for this reform. Thus transferring irrigation management popularly known as
Irrigation Management Transfer (IMT) and transferring operation and maintenance
to the farmers, were the key elements of the irrigation reform process.
Gender was not on the radar of irrigation thinking since its objectives were
clearly geared towards sustainable management of the systems and the increased
efficiency of irrigation and crop productivity. Women were not considered as users
and farmers were typically male. Thus in the initial years one finds little writing and
thinking on gender and irrigation. Some of the early assessments of the IMT programmes were done by IWMI (then IIMI) Colombo which clearly showed that IMT
was a mixed bag of experiences. Some were positive and many not so positive.
However much of this analysis was within the framework of normal irrigation thinking guided by efficiency, productivity and financial recovery improvements
(Vermillion 1997).
Critical writing on how the shifts in water policy impacted women in the context
of irrigation also emerged around the mid-nineties. These writings pointed to the
commoditization of water and a gradual erosion of water rights especially for
women (Zwarteveen 1997, 1998; Kulkarni et al. 2008). However there were also
cautionary articles pointing to the need to not ignore the agency of women and men
in these changing contexts. Jackson (1998) argues the need to look at the subjectivities of women and their embodied livelihoods to understand the ways in which
women relate to water (Jackson 1998).
Some of the early writings on role of women in irrigation also came from IWMI’s
gender group and it highlighted both the role of women in irrigation and also the
impact of IMT on female farmers. These studies showed that a water user is not a
neutral homogenous category, but there are differences between male and female
water users since roles in farming are different. The authors thus argued that the
impacts of IMT vary significantly across different groups of users (Zwarteveen and
Neupane 1996).
Despite these differences women were not identified as farmers and were
excluded from farmer organizations. Their interests were thus marginalized and this
exclusion, the studies concluded, is constraining and may have serious impacts on
women’s well being (Merrey 1997).
Researches done in different parts of Africa and Asia also showed similar findings in terms of women’s exclusion from irrigation planning, in some cases these
exclusions were related to ownership of land and in others simply because of a lack
of formalized policies of inclusion of women in different for a to allow for better
allocation of irrigated lands (van Koppen 1998). Extensive researches were done to
identify and typify women farmers across different regions of the globe and provide
a tool base for assessment of indicators for improvement of gender performance
(van Koppen 2002).

 
82

S. Kulkarni

In the Indian context IMT was largely known by the name of Participatory
Irrigation Management. Although there are historical evidences of community managed irrigation systems that can be traced to centuries ago the formal idea is as
recent as the twentieth century. In fact Maharashtra and Gujarat had formed water
users associations as early as the 1930s. Although there was little response then, the
PIM movement in India geared up towards the late 1980s with the first formal Water
Users Association being formed in Maharashtra, in Ahmednagar district on one
minor canal of the Mula Major Irrigation Project in 1989 (SOPPECOM 2004).
Since then there has been leapfrogging in India with several states by the end of
2012 making PIM mandatory (Shah 2011).
Literature in the context of gender and irrigation is very sparse in the Indian
context. Broadly it can be classified as literature that came from (a) critical understanding of irrigation as a modernizing project, increasing undue burdens of the
laboring classes and (b) from experiences gained through including women in the
PIM process.
Critical writings on irrigation and women’s role came in the late 1980s and early
1990s. As mentioned earlier Shiva’s writings brought out the destructive powers of
irrigation through the damming of rivers- on both rivers and women. Agarwal and
others have contested these views but in a different way shown how irrigated agriculture in fact hinges on the availability of cheap female labour thereby leading to
their exploitation. In her study she showed how among the Garo tribes irrigation led
to privatization of land and subsequent displacement of women from critical role in
agriculture (Agarwal 1994). Agarwal and Shiva essentially show how development
of irrigation in fact commoditised agriculture and displaced women from subsistence agriculture. This was also lucidly brought out by Ramamurthy in her study of
WUAs in Andhra Pradesh where she shows how irrigation as a modernizing strategy has led to increased agricultural productivity and surpluses and in the process
altered the sexual division of labour, workloads and labour processes of women
across castes and classes to the disadvantage of women (Ramamurthy 1991). Studies
in Maharashtra have also shown how irrigation, resultant sugarcane cultivation has
led to intensified alcoholism amongst men and subsequently increased violence
against women (Seshu and Bhosale 1990).
The other set of writings around gender and water in irrigation come from groups
working in the public irrigation sector. This was partly as a response to donor agendas which in turn were also largely influenced by critical work around gender and
water. Much of this work was within the framework of providing women with facilities that are directly related to their current roles of cleaning, cooking, washing etc.
Thus bathing steps in canals or clearly demarcated spaces for washing and cleaning
were some of the policy and programmatic prescriptions in the context of gender
and irrigation (Shah 2002). This work pointed out that women’s priority concerns
and needs are around domestic water i.e. cooking, bathing washing i.e around the
reproductive needs and not so much around the productive needs despite the fact
that they were served by the canal. However it also brought out how women make
multiple uses of a water system. Much of this literature emerged from practitioners

 
5 Gender and Water in India: A Review

83

working in the irrigation sector guided largely by the understanding that participation is a means to an end and in this case the end is clearly that of improving irrigation efficiency. Women are simply an add on. It also comes from disciplinary
understandings that seldom challenge the existing social order. So neither are the
goals of irrigation seen beyond efficiency and nor are women seen beyond their role
of nurture and care for the household. The same organizations that set out with these
understandings of irrigation and women also changed their objectives over time
with exchange of new perspectives and ideas. A significant example in this regard is
that of Aga Khan Rural Support Programme (AKRSP) in Gujarat which has been
working on PIM extensively. Recognising that canals were used for multiple purposes such as washing, bathing, livestock and of course irrigation, the organisation
decided to rethink canal management. They introduced women’s nominal membership to the WUA committees irrespective of ownership to land in commands.
Women were thus recognised as users of water. AKRSP fought against the rules of
the Irrigation department and brought women onto committees. The experience has
been positive and AKRSP has documented the change this action has brought about
in women in terms of their active interest in management activities, participation in
agriculture and farming related trainings, but above all the confidence in dealing
with Irrigation officials and talking to them of their problems (Vasavada 2005).
However around the same time or a little earlier there were writings in India
looking at lift irrigation schemes and women’s participation in it from a feminist
perspective. These writings looked at empowerment and changing gender relations
as a result of irrigation and related interventions (Ahmed 1999). Sadguru foundation
working in tribal areas of Gujarat in its lift irrigation interventions involved women
in decision making. Despite the restrictive rules of the government in terms of
including women in the executive committee of the lift co-operatives, Sadguru went
ahead and formed the committees with nominal membership of women. Later in
1996 the law was amended to include three women on the executive committee of
the Lift Irrigation co-operative. According to Sara Ahmed’s study of three lift cooperatives of Sadguru, women’s lives have changed substantially. In her study she
brings out the positive impact of women’s participation in the scheme and the role
they played in resolving conflicts related to water sharing and water rotation. She
has also documented changes in women’s self perception, confidence and importantly mapped the changes in gender roles that were brought out so vividly after
Sadguru’s participatory exercise to map changes in sexual division of labour.
In Jharkhand with support from Professional Assistance for Development Action
(PRADAN) an innovative programme around women’s participation in Community
managed lift irrigation schemes (CMLI) was initiated. Initially designed to be the
male irrigators programme in the dry areas of Jharkhand, the CMLIS were later
controlled by all women WUAs linked to the SHGs. When managed by the men
farmers, WUAs it was reported were not effective as water charges were not being
collected, and maintenance was not being done apart from several other problems in
running the scheme effectively. When Pradan decided to finally close down these
schemes, they thought of using the rich SHG experience with women and asked

 
84

S. Kulkarni

women if they would be able to manage the WUAs. After considerable inputs in
terms of organising the WUAs around the existing SHGs, training the women in
O&M, all women WUAs were formed and full charge of these WUAs was then
taken over by the women, cutting across different SHGs. The successful management
of this activity, enhanced the self esteem of women and their confidence grew
(Sarkar and Sarkar 2005).
Earlier still from the late 1980s to early 1990s there were new ideas being discussed in non party political groups in Maharashtra which looked at water as a
means of production and thus calling for sharing this resource in an equitable manner. Shramik Mukti Dal (SMD), a left thinking group articulated this in the form of
right to assured water for livelihoods at an affordable cost. SMD worked out through
intensive field based experiments the quantum of water that a household of five
would require annually in a drought prone region. The demand was also expressed
in terms of a per capita requirement to ensure that women are not excluded from this
right in a household context irrespective of landholding. In principle thus SMD
included the rights of women and landless in the context of water. The operationalisation of this right was of course a far more complex matter. Thus when the organization after a long struggle against the sand mafia planned and implemented its first
people’s dam- Baliraja, it ensured sharing of water rights not only on a household
basis but made separate allocations within the household for women. This was
exemplary and radical and addressed the gender question in the broader framework
of societal change and gender justice. A few experiments were initiated on a few
plots where one tenth of an acre was carved out for women and they began cultivating it using some of the water allocated as a household resource. This initiative
needed a concerted effort for it to see its fuller development (Joy and Paranjape
2005).
In Karnataka the example of women’s collectivisation in Kolar district of
Karnataka where rural women were organised since the mid 1980s by Grama Vikas
is significant. Kolar district has about 4500 traditional tanks which were constructed
and managed under royal patronage. Most of these tanks were filled with silt and
were no longer able to fulfil the water requirements of the communities living in the
area. Women spoke about this to Gram Vikas and thus Grameen Mahila Okkuta
(rural women’s collective) was formed. With a strong mobilisation they were able
to pressurise the government to repair and desilt these traditional tanks which then
became a significant source of water (Joy and Paranjape 2005).
NGO efforts in involving women in decision making in PIM were seen across the
country through the 1990s. In Orissa PIM was introduced in the mid nineties through
a state level policy. Thereafter formation of water users associations (WUAs) and
transferring of management of irrigation to these WUAs became a targetted programme of the Irrigation department. In the initial stages there were no special
efforts made to involve women in these WUAs. Aunli command of Angul district
was one of the early experiments in irrigation to involve women in planning and
decision making (Dalwai undated). This was possible because interestingly 67 % of
women owned land in this canal command. Men had not responded to the governments call to form a WUA, but women saw the potential and collectivized to form

 
5 Gender and Water in India: A Review

85

the WUA and an all women’s executive committee that took and implemented key
decisions. This example is very important and marks a milestone in the history of
women and irrigation in India (cited in Joy and Paranjape 2005).
Following on this in the mid 1990s a different kind of an experiment was initiated in Khudawadi village of Osmanabad district of Maharashtra. On a medium
irrigation project of this drought prone region a WUA was formed on one minor
canal of the Kurnur Medium Irrigation project with the initiative of
SOPPECOM. Frustrated with their experience with the Irrigation department for
more than 20 years since the completion of the irrigation project, farmers in
Khudawadi responded to SOPPECOM’s initiative of forming a WUA and entering
into an agreement with the department. In this case however the farmers at the
behest of SOPPEOM also added a new component of extending equity beyond the
command area by including landless women as beneficiaries of irrigation water. The
WUA thus agreed to a 15 % share of their water quota for landless women to use
water outside the command areas. Lands were thus leased in by the women’s collectives; storage ponds were constructed to lift the canal water and use it on the leased
lands to grow fodder and fuel and some food.2 In several ways this action countered
the conventional thinking that irrigation is male and that it is limited to canal command (Kulkarni 2005).
Efforts on expanding the notion of equity in the irrigation sector continued and
this is reflected in the writings in the post 2002 period. Stronger critiques of irrigation policies and programmes from a feminist perspective were gradually emerging
on the gender water scenario in India (Kulkarni 2005; Kulkarni et al. 2007; Vasavada
2005). These critiques were also informing programmes and policy issues in the
irrigation sector. They challenged the notion that women’s realm is restricted to the
domestic and the productive is for the men. These alternative frameworks have
raised considerable questions regarding the conventional and instrumental roles
expected of women in the water sector.
All of these examples where diverse groups of women stood up in a primarily
male domain are noteworthy. Examples from Orissa, Jharkhand, Gujarat and
Karnataka, indicate women’s overriding considerations for survival and livelihoods
and hence the need to take on challenges that men do not. These experiences do
empower them and create some spaces to negotiate power within the households as
was evident from the work in Sadguru. However, to conclude that water intervention
alone led to these changes would be rather presumptuous. Examples from
Maharashtra aim to change the discourses around water and gender. The SMD
example particularly is making an effort to address the issue beyond water by looking at structures, identities and also the mainstream discourses around both water
and society.
Two significant findings emerged from these early experiences (1) women play a
significant role in irrigated agriculture and (2) despite this they are excluded from

2

Details of how the negotiations were worked out can be found in Looking back … in flowing
upstream.

 
86

S. Kulkarni

formally or informally being represented in water users associations and involved in
planning and decision making.
These findings helped in policy advocacy and mainstreaming some of these ideas
in the field. It also led to stronger advocacy to define women as a category worthy
of notice in irrigation and the need to bring them in decision making committees of
the WUAs (Kulkarni 2005; Vasavada 2005).
PIM legislations brought in the recent years did introduce some changes in its
governance structures. With the introduction of quotas in the managing committees
for women and in some states3 joint membership of men and women from land
holding families within command areas have at least legally created a space for
women in irrigation. The potential is large and some efforts are being made to use
this space in Maharashtra and elsewhere. However, women’s lack of participation in
irrigation goes beyond the hitherto lack of legal or formal spaces. It goes back to the
construction of irrigation as a male activity and the farmer as a male entity. It overlooks the labour of women in both the reproductive and productive terrains which
contribute towards household survival.
While formal representation was being seen as an important demand by gender
water advocates different studies since the late 1990s also showed how formal representation does not necessarily bring women into active decision making (MeinzenDick and Zwarteveen 1998); (Kulkarni 2011). In 1997 Ruth and Margreet’s study
on women and irrigation in the context of South Asia shows that despite some of the
formal spaces granted in policies women are rarely able to use these spaces due to
the iniquitous structures. As recently as in 2011, a study done by SOPPECOM,
Utthan and TISS on decentralization, gender and water, points to women’s lack of
participation in decision making especially in the irrigation sector. It shows that
despite formal representation women are simply not able to participate effectively
as a result of past histories of patriarchy and caste (Kulkarni 2011; Kulkarni and Joy
2012).
In irrigation, of course formal representation remained limited to women who
own lands in the command areas of these irrigation projects. Participatory Irrigation
Management laws restrict membership of WUAs to owners or holders of land within
the command areas of canals. This is the first level of exclusion and so far there has
not been any headway in this regard. Madhya Pradesh is the only state which has
made some progress by including spouses of land holders and owners in canal commands as members of WUAs. Thus in general the demand for recognising women
as farmers and with a legitimate right to assured water has not been acknowledged
by policy makers.
Right to water for production often becomes a tricky issue in the context of water
for women especially because it is so closely linked with access to land. Studies
around landownership have shown that not more than 11–12 % women own land
(Agarwal 1994). Secondly mobilising women for water rights which are largely
usufruct rights is complex as women are divided across social groups such as that of

3

Madhya Pradesh PIM Act includes spouses of landowners and holders to become members.

 
5 Gender and Water in India: A Review

87

caste, class, religion and across households. Identities around social groups and
households are stronger, especially when it comes to livelihood resources.
As we can see much of the research and practice in the area of gender and irrigation has largely focused on making women visible through documenting gendered
work patterns, which provides a case for improving their rights over water use and
their representation in water related institutions like the water users association.
While this body of work has been very useful in establishing a case for women and
recognizing them as stakeholders in the sector, it has neglected some of the central
issues of critiquing irrigation, its association with men and technocracy and the
resultant exclusion of the weak or the powerless. Presence of women in water management is not only about ensuring that they enter the predefined formal spaces in
irrigation decision making, but also how these pre-defined boundaries of thinking
and practice can change. A comparison between both the sectors has shown us how
the drawing of these boundaries has in fact served to maintain and strengthen the
existing gender hierarchies and identities that foreclose options for change, how
policy and programmatic changes are also constrained by the imagery and belief
systems that surround irrigation thinking. As recent literature (see Zwarteveen 2008
for example) points out, exploring this relationship is perhaps what lies at the heart
of understanding the power relations within the sector.
This has also led to developing another aspect of gender and water which focuses
on men, masculinities and water (Zwarteveen 2008). This body of work looks at the
association between masculinity and professional water performance and brings out
how power and politics in water appear as self evident, static and gender neutral. It
thus argues for the need for going beyond representation of women to critically
looking at the nature of water knowledges. An initial exploratory study in the Indian
context in this regard was done in the field of women as water professionals. This
study done by SOPPECOM at the behest of SaciWATERs (SOPPECOM 2009)
looked at mainly women engineers and other managerial level women professionals
working in the water sector mainly with government departments across South
Asia. The study clearly brought out the low numbers of women professionals in
water bureaucracy and this linked to their understanding of water as a technocentric
and masculine subject. It was also evident from the way water priorities were set
(emphasis on infrastructure over participation), work allocations were decided (site
work for men and desk work for women or financial and design planning for men
and the administrative work for women) and of course infrastructure was available
(no toilets and child care facilities in offices for example). Such studies would help
unpack the gender question in the context of water in a qualitatively different way
by understanding irrigation as a masculine and hegemonic discipline that constrains
participation of women and other discriminated groups. The focus would then be to
rethinking irrigation and revisiting our ideas around different genders, castes, class
and power dynamics within and among them.

 
88

5.7

S. Kulkarni

Concluding Remarks

While grassroots initiatives related to gender and water have responded to everyday
crises related to water and social injustice, policies to address gender equity in the
water sector have often been in an awkward relationship with the ground realities
where gender and other forms of social discrimination pervade all aspects of life.
They are simply not able to capture the social barriers that cause unequal access to
water and an undemocratic decision making process.
A considered approach to gender or caste question in water would call for a critical analysis of the constraints imposed on women’s and men’s access to resources
by social structures, the gendered divisions of labour and a water paradigm that
brings in new reallocations and altered social and labour relations which firmly
entrench new forms of discrimination.
Learnings from over two decades of work around this question urge us to give
fresh insights to the question. While a social justice agenda that brings in representation of women and socially disadvantaged groups in decision making and access
to basic livelihood water would be an important policy measure, there is a need to
go beyond this policy rhetoric and address several other stakeholders through engaging them in creative ways of addressing inequities in water.
That there is a need to restructure both the water sector as well as our understanding of what constitutes the notion of women and gender relations has been stated on
several forums. Policy suggestions based on this understanding have seen the inclusion of women and other socially disadvantaged groups in water institutions but has
not improved their access to the resource (SOPPECOM 2002).
So while policy advocacy within water remains an important area of intervention, it’s time that new agendas and creative forms of engagement are available for
people’s movements- more specifically women’s movements, farmers movements
and unions working on the question of growing informalisation of the economy,
greater accumulation of capital increasing injustices and disparities in everyday living- to see the linkages between land, water, rivers, natural resources and livelihoods. There is a need to cut across sectoral understandings around natural resources
since they are being appropriated by capital with active connivance of the state to
the disadvantage of the socially and economically discriminated groups. There is a
need to bring in interdisciplinarity in research and activism. It might be worthwhile
for example to explore how (a) reallocations of water are modifying tenure, labour
and consumption relations and identities, in particular focusing on caste, class and
gender divisions and identities; (b) identifying new possibilities and proposals for
influencing water decision making and water activism to arrive at forms of water
allocation that are fair – in terms of how incomes and benefits as well as costs and
risks are shared among different (groups of) people at different and across scales –
and sustainable.

 
5 Gender and Water in India: A Review

89

References
Agarwal, B. (1992). The gender and environment debate: Lessons from India. Feminist Studies,
18(1), 119–158.
Agarwal, B. (1994). A field of one’s own: Gender and land rights in South Asia. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Ahmed, S. (1999). Changing gender roles in irrigation management: Sadguru’s lift irrigation cooperatives. Economic and Political Weekly, 34(51), 3596–3606.
Ahmed, S. (2000). In search of a drop: Women and drinking water management in rural Gujarat
(India) – The case of SEWA (Working paper, 137). Anand: Gujarat Institute of Rural
Management.
Ahmed, S. (2005). Why is gender equity a concern for water management? In S. Ahmed (Ed.),
Flowing upstream: Empowering women through water management initiatives in India. New
Delhi/Ahmedabad: Foundation India Books/Centre for Environment Education.
Blaikie, P. (1985). The political economy of soil erosion in developing countries. London/New
York: Longman.
Chakravarti, U. (2006). Gendering caste: Through a feminist lens. Calcutta: Stree (Bhatkal and
Sen).
Cleaver, F., & Elson, D. (1995). Women and water resources: Continued marginalisation and new
policies (GATEKEEPER series, No. 49). London: International Institute of Environment and
Development (IIED), Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods Programme.
Dalwai, A. (Undated). Can women do PIM. Available at www.inpim.org/library/newsletters/
N5a%.html
Feldhaus, A. (1995). Water and womanhood: Religious meanings of rivers in Maharashtra.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Gavankar, R. (2003). Sparrow. Mumbai.
Geetha, V. (2002). Gender. Calcutta: Stree (Bhatkal and Sen).
Ghosh, J. (2009). Never done and poorly paid: Women’s work in globalising India. New Delhi:
Women Unlimited.
Green, C., & Baden, S. (1995). Integrated water resources management: A gender perspective.
Institute of Development Studies, 26(1), 92–100.
Green, C., Joekes, S., & Leach, M. (1998). Questionable links: Approaches to gender in environmental research and policy. In C. Jackson & R. Pearson (Eds.), Feminist visions of development: Gender analysis and policy. London: Routledge.
Guha, R. (1989). The unquiet woods: Ecological change and peasant resistance in the Himalaya.
Berkeley/Oxford: University of California Press/Oxford University Press.
Iyengar, S. (2000). Women’s initiatives in development and management of sustainable drinking
water sources in Gujarat villages: Issues and case studies (unpublished, mimeo). Ahmedabad:
Gujarat Institute of Development Research.
Jackson, C. (1993). Doing what comes naturally? Women and environment in development. World
Development, 21(12), 1947–1963.
Jackson, C. (1998). Gender irrigation and environment: Arguing for agency. Agriculture and
Human Values, 15, 313–324.
Joshi, D., & Fawcett, B. (2005). The role of water in an unequal social order in India. Oxford:
Berg.
Joy, K. J., & Paranjape, S. (2005). Women and water: Relationships, issues and experiences. In
B. Ray (Ed.), Women in India: Post colonial period. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kulkarni, S. (2005). Looking back, thinking forward: The Khudawadi experience with access to
irrigation for women and the landless. In S. Ahmed (Ed.), Flowing upstream: Empowering
women through water management initiatives in India. New Delhi: Foundations Books.
Kulkarni, S. (2011). Women and decentralised water governance: Issues, challenges and the way
forward. Economic & Political Weekly, xlvi(64), 18 EPW.

 
90

S. Kulkarni

Kulkarni, S., & Joy, K. J. (2012). Decentralising or marginalising women: Gender relations and
sector reforms in India. In M. Zwarteveen, S. Ahmed, & S. Gautam (Eds.), Diverting the flow:
Gender equity and water in South Asia. New Delhi: Zubaan.
Kulkarni, S., Ahmed, S., Arya, S., Joy, K. J., & Paranjape, S. (2007). Women, water and livelihoods: A review of policy towards evolving a gender just vision for water. Pune: Women and
Water Network and SOPPECOM.
Kulkarni, S., Joy, K. J., & Paranjape, S. (2008). Gender issues in the water sector- review of challenges and emerging strategies. In V. Ballabh (Ed.), Governance of water: Institutional alternatives and political economy. New Delhi: Sage.
Lahiri-Dutt, K. (2006). Nadi O Nari representing the river and women of the rural communities in
the Bengal Delta. In K. Lahiri Dutt (Ed.), Fluid bonds: Views on gender and water. Kolkata:
Stree Books.
Lahiri-Dutt, K. (2012). Large water control mechanisms: Gender impact of the damodar valley
corporation, India. In M. Zwarteveen, S. Ahmed, & S. R. Gautam (Eds.), Diverting the flow:
Gender equity and water in South Asia. New Delhi: Zubaan.
Meinzen-Dick, R., & Zwarteveen, M. (1998). Gendered participation in water management: Issues
and illustrations from water users’ associations in South Asia. Agriculture and Human Values,
15, 337–345.
Mehta, L. (2009). Displaced by development: Confronting marginalisation and gender injustice.
New Delhi: Sage.
Menon, N. (2012). Seeing like a feminist. New Delhi: Zubaan/Penguin.
Merchant, C. (1983). The death of nature: Women, ecology, and the scientific revolution. London:
Harper and Row.
Merrey, D. J. (1997). Institutional design principles for accountability on large irrigation system
(Research report, 8). Colombo: IIMI.
Mies, M. (1986). Patriarchy and accumulation on a world scale: Women in the international division of labour. London: Zed Books.
Mies, M., & Shiva, V. (1993). Ecofeminism. London: Zed Books.
Mohanty, M. (2004). Readings in indian government and politics: Class, caste, gender. New
Delhi: Sage.
Ramamurthy, P. (1991). Rural women and irrigation: patriarchy, class, and the modernizing state
in South India. Society & Natural Resources: An International Journal, 4(1), Special Issue:
Women and Natural Resources in developing Countries, 5–22.
Rocheleau, D. B., Thomas-Slayter, E., & Wangari, E. (Eds.). (1996). Feminist political ecology:
Global issues and local experiences. London/New York: Routledge.
Salleh, A. (1990). The politics of representation. Arena, 91, 163–169.
Salleh, A. (1991). Essentialism – And ecofeminism. Arena, 94, 167–173.
Sarkar, S., & Sarkar,S. (2005). Water women: Managing community lift irrigation systems in
Jharkhand. In S. Ahmed (Ed.), Flowing upstream – Empowering women through water management initiatives in India (Environment and development series). Ahmedabad: Centre for
Environment and Education.
Seshu, M., & Bhosale, V. (1990). Imprisoning womanwood – A report on death and desertions of
women in Sangli distirct. Sangli: V.I.D.P.
Shah, A. (2002). Women, water, irrigation – Respecting women’s priorities. Economic and Political
Weekly, XXXVII(43), 4413–4419.
Shah, T. (2011). Past present and the future of canal irrigation in India (India infrastructure development report 2011 – Water: Policy and performance for sustainable development). New
Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Shiva, V. (1989). Staying alive: Women, ecology and survival in India. New Delhi: Zed Press.
Singh, S. (2012, July 17). The water warriors. The Hindu, 2012.
SOPPECOM. (2002). Restructuring the water sector a framework for restructuring of water sector
in sustainable, equitable and participatory lines.
SOPPECOM. (2004). Participatory irrigation management: An overview of issues and way ahead.

 
5 Gender and Water in India: A Review

91

SOPPECOM. (2009). Situational analysis of women water professionals in South Asia. Pune:
SaciWATERs.
United Nations Development Programme. (2003). Human development report: A compact among
nations to end human poverty. New York: Oxford University Press.
United Nations World Commission on Environment and Development. (1987). Our common
future, also known as the Brundtland report. Oslo: WCED.
Utthangujarat.org. Accessed 11 June 2013.
van Koppen, B. (1998). Water rights, gender, and poverty alleviation. Inclusion and exclusion of
women and men smallholders in public irrigation infrastructure development. Agriculture and
Human Values, 15, 361–374.
van Koppen, B. (2002). A gender performance indicator for irrigation: Concepts tools and applications Sri Lanka (IWMI research report, 59).
Vasavada, S. (2005). Mainstreaming gender concerns in participatory irrigation management: The
role of AKRSP(I) in South Gujarat. In S. Ahmed (Ed.), Flowing upstream – Empowering
women through water management initiatives in India (Environment and development series).
Ahmedabad: Centre for Environment and Education.
Vermillion, D. L. (1997). The impacts of irrigation management transfer: A review of evidence
(Research report, 11). Colombo: IIMI.
Zwarteveen, M. (1995). Gender aspects of irrigation management transfer: Rethinking efficiency
and equity. In S. H. Johnson, D. L. Vermillion, & J. A. Sagardoy (Eds.), Irrigation management
transfer. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Zwarteveen, M. (1997). Water: From basic need to commodity. A discussion on gender and water
rights in the context of irrigation. World Development, 25(8), 1335–1349.
Zwarteveen, M. (1998). Identifying gender aspects of new irrigation management policies.
Agriculture and Human Values, 15, 301–312.
Zwarteveen, M. (2008). Men masculinities and water powers in irrigation. Water Alternatives,
1(1), 111–130.
Zwarteveen, M., & Neupane, N. (1996). Free-riders or victims. Women’s non-participation in
irrigation management in Nepal’s Chhattis Mauja Irrigation Scheme (Research report, 7).
Colombo: International Irrigation Management Institute.
Zwarteveen, M., Ahmed, S., & Gautam, S. R. (2012). Diverting the flow: Gender equity and water
in South Asia. New Delhi: Zubaan.

 
Chapter 6

Independent Regulatory Agencies in Water
Sector in India: Debate and Discourse
Sachin Warghade

Abstract The rise of the ‘regulatory state’ in developing countries has remained an
understudied phenomenon. It is characterized by arm’s length regulation, achieved
by creation of Independent Regulatory Agency (IRA). The diffusion and transplantation of IRA models, from developed country context into a developing country
context, is a critical juncture for analyzing the emergence of regulatory state in
developing country. This paper reviews the debate generated in India when such
transplantation began in a politically sensitive and ecologically complex sector like
water. This is done by placing the local debate in the wider international discourse
on IRA.
The review shows how different mechanisms of institutional isomorphism –
coercive isomorphism, mimetic isomorphism, and policy learning – can be used to
explain the structure and substance of regulation being adopted in India. Reforms
through isomorphism raise concerns on the appropriate rationale for IRA in water
sector. Review of the related laws suggests that the conventional credible commitment rationale is inadequate to explain the emergence of these IRAs. Political
uncertainty, the root-cause of credible commitment rationale, needs to be explored
as an appropriate rationale for IRA for ensuring development and implementation
of long-term, integrated and consistent policy framework on water resources. But
this requires proper sequencing of reforms in which the evolution of normative
framework precedes creation of new institutions like IRA. The paper further reviews
the normative aspects, such as equity and efficiency, to show how reconciling of
seemingly contrasting principles is a huge challenge in developing an effective regulatory model. Finally the paper presents the idea of ‘decentered regulation’ and
‘sunshine commission’ as the two alternative propositions relevant for the developing country context.
Keywords Water regulation • Independent regulatory agency • Institutional transplantation • Regulatory state • Developing country

S. Warghade (*)
Tata Institute of Social Sciences, V. N. Purav Marg, Deonar, Mumbai, India
e-mail: sachinwarghade@gmail.com; sachin.warghade@tiss.edu
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
V. Narain, A. Narayanamoorthy (eds.), Indian Water Policy
at the Crossroads: Resources, Technology and Reforms,
Global Issues in Water Policy 16, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-25184-4_6

93

 
94

S. Warghade

List of Abbreviations
IRA
MWRRA
WRA

6.1

Independent Regulatory Agency
Maharashtra Water Resources Regulatory Authority
Water Regulatory Authority

Introduction

The phenomenon of creation of Independent Regulatory Agencies (hereafter
referred as IRA) in water sector is a recent development in India as compared to its
counterpart in other utility sectors such as electricity or telecom. The proposal for
establishment of such Water Regulatory Authorities (hereafter referred to as WRA)
at the state-level has its origin in the reform agenda driven by international financial
institutions such as the World Bank (Warghade and Wagle 2014). Now it has become
an internal reform agenda of the Central Government. For example, the 12th Five
Year Plan of India includes a section on WRAs and it also proposes a model bill for
adoption by the states. The 13th Finance Commission also earmarked a grant which
the states could avail on the condition that they would establish a WRA. The process
began with the establishment of the Maharashtra Water Resources Regulatory
Authority (hereafter referred as MWRRA) in 2005. The MWRRA Act became a
model for adoption by other states. Apart from the State of Maharashtra, such regulatory authorities have been established in other States such as Arunachal Pradesh
(2006), Uttar Pradesh (2008/2014), Andhra Pradesh (2010), Jammu and Kashmir
(2010), Rajasthan (2012), and Madhya Pradesh (2013).1
An IRA is a statutory body empowered to undertake important regulatory functions. Various regulatory functions, such as determination of water tariff, are delegated to IRA. Most important characteristics feature of an IRA is that it serves as an
arm’s length body. Autonomy is accorded to the regulator, though in varying
degrees, to carry-out the functions independent of their political principals. A typical IRA comprises members who are experts in the respective field. Members are
not officers serving in the government but may have worked for government in the
past. It is often a quasi-judicial body with powers equivalent to the civil court. The
orders of such an authority are legally enforceable. The State Electricity Regulatory
Commissions in India or the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India are typical
examples of an IRA.
1

Following laws have been passed till date for establishment of IRA at state-level: The Maharashtra
Water Resources Regulatory Authority Act 2005, The Arunachal Pradesh Water Resources
Regulatory Authority Act 2006, The Uttar Pradesh Water Management and Regulatory Commission
Act 2014 (the Act of 2008 was revoked and replaced by the Act of 2014), Andhra Pradesh Water
Resources Regulatory Commission Act 2010, The Jammu and Kashmir Water Resources
Regulation and Management Act 2010, The Rajasthan Water Resources Regulatory Authority Act,
2012 The Madhya Pradesh Jal Viniyaman Adhiniyam (Water Regulation Act) 2013.

 
6

Independent Regulatory Agencies in Water Sector in India: Debate and Discourse

95

The WRAs established in India are representative of the typical IRA. For example, they are constituted by members having expertise in water engineering or water
economy. The MWRRA, which is the longest functioning WRA in India, is empowered to make autonomous decisions on water tariff and other regulation issues mentioned in the law. WRAs in other states have generally followed the model laid
down by MWRRA with some state-specific variations. For example, the WRA in
Uttar Pradesh has to recommend a cess on beneficiaries of flood control measures
undertaken by the government. The WRA in Andhra Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh
have been assigned advisory role. In their current form, they resemble the ‘advisory
regulator’, which is seen as a transitional model of regulation before moving towards
an IRA model (Brown et al. 2006, p. 99). But the overall direction to move towards
economic efficiency through independent regulation is evident from these different
state-level regulatory laws.
There is a wider discourse in the international literature on IRA as a component
of regulatory reforms. There is a need to understand this discourse in relation to the
debate that the WRA has generated in India. This paper presents a review of this
debate by placing it in the context of the international discourse on IRAs.

6.2

The Rise of Regulatory State

The development of WRAs can be understood in greater depth by locating the phenomena in the context of the rise of ‘regulatory state’ (Majone 1994, 1997; Moran
2002; Minogue and Carino 2006; Dubash and Morgan 2013). Regulation has
emerged as the central mode of governance in developed countries. In the context of
Europe, the transition from the interventionist and welfare-oriented governance to
predominantly regulation-oriented governance is characterized as the rise of ‘regulatory state’ (Majone 1997). This is seen as the outcome of coming together of
important processes, viz., privatization of public sectors, deregulation of business
activities, and regulation by arms-length bodies such as the ‘independent regulatory
agency’ (IRA). This transition to regulatory state is now taking place in developing
countries, although with its own characteristic features (Minogue and Carino 2006;
Dubash and Morgan 2013). Hence, the debate around the WRAs in India needs to
be located within this larger discourse on the regulatory state.
Delegation to an IRA is one of the characteristic features of the regulatory state.
These IRAs are often categorized as non-majoritarian institutions of the government that posses specialized public authority. Members of an IRA are neither
directly elected by the people, nor directly controlled by elected officials (Thatcher
and Sweet Stone 2002). This is the ultimate step in delegation in a representative
democratic set-up and hence becomes a very crucial and often controversial feature
of the regulatory state (Gilardi 2001).
The WRAs being established in India represent this particular form of institutional reforms. Their spread in India can be viewed as part of the phenomena of
diffusion of IRAs in different sectors and in different countries. The IRA as a

 
96

S. Warghade

regulatory model was first established in USA and later spread to Europe. Studies
suggest that the majority of the diffusion in UK and Europe started in 1980s coinciding with the Thatcher era of privatization. A comprehensive dataset has been
developed on diffusion of IRAs in Western Europe, Latin America and other OECD
countries (Jordana et al. 2011; Gilardi 2008). Although there is no concrete data-set,
there are references to diffusion of IRA models in Asia and Africa (Estache and
Goicoechea 2005, pp. 138–150). Starting mainly from financial sector (banking,
securities, insurance), the IRA model has spread to utility (electricity, water, telecom, gas), general competition and also to social sector (food safety, work safety,
health, pension, environment).
In India, the diffusion of the IRA model is happening across different sectors and
different states. Starting from the financial sector (like the Reserve Bank of India)
the IRA model is now adopted in various sectors such as electricity (the Central and
State Electricity Regulatory Commissions), telecom (the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India), and general competition (Competition Commission of India).
The state-level WRAs, that are being set up in India, are the new additions to this
existing list of IRAs. This could be seen as the beginning of the rise of the regulatory state in water sector. This signals a dramatic shift in Indian water policy and
governance.

6.3

Institutional Transplantation

Scholars identify ‘institutional transplantation’ of the regulatory models as one of
the key features of the regulatory state in developing countries (Minogue and Carino
2006; Dubash and Morgan 2012; Dubash and Morgan 2013). The mechanisms of
transplantation or diffusion will provide valuable insights into the nature of regulatory reforms in water sector.
The diffusion mechanisms have been studied by scholars of institutional theories
(Peters 1999; Gilardi 2004). An important component of this is the theory of sociological isomorphism, which asks the question of why a similar form of institution
emerges in absolutely different political or social context (Peters 1999). For example, why relatively similar forms of regulatory authorities, such as IRA, emerge
across the developed and developing countries in financial, utility and other sectors
including water? This is a relevant question considering that the WRAs have similarities with IRAs in electricity and other sectors in India. Also the water regulatory
model that emerged in different states in India is relatively similar to the model first
established in Maharashtra. The institutional theory explains this in terms of various
mechanism of diffusion or isomorphism. The two mechanisms relevant to our case
are: coercive isomorphism and mimetic isomorphism.
Coercive isomorphism is due to the pressure exerted from other organizations on
which the policy makers or government are dependent for various reasons. In the
current water case, it is clear that the Maharashtra model of WRA has its genesis in
the World Bank supported project in which the funding was provided under the

 
6

Independent Regulatory Agencies in Water Sector in India: Debate and Discourse

97

covenant of establishment of IRA. Similarly the conditional grant provided by the
Central Government under the 13th Finance Commission acts as an external pressure on the states to adopt the regulatory model. Considering the fiscal constraints
at the state-level, on raising funds for development and management of water
resources, these external pressures on the government to adopt IRA models in return
for funds leads to coercive isomorphism.
Apart from the coercive forms, there are evidences of mimetic forms of diffusion
in case of WRA. In mimetic isomorphism there is a tendency to mimic or imitate
models from other places in belief that they represent the ‘best practices’ model.
This is seen in case of MWRRA, which is considered as model for replication by
other states. For example, the law for establishment of WRA in Arunachal Pradesh
is a ditto copy of the MWRRA Act.
One of the variant of the coercive and mimetic isomorphism is the mechanism of
diffusion through ‘policy learning’ (Peters 1999). Here it is assumed that the organizations would learn from the experiences of others and will adapt the models as
per the suitability to the local context. There are evidences showing that the
MWRRA law was accepted after a deliberative process conducted in the form of
consultations and scrutiny by legislative committee (Warghade 2013). There have
been some changes in the model after this consultative process. Most importantly,
‘equity’ emerged as an important principle in the MWRRA Act. For example, the
law accepts ‘equity’ as the principle for determination of water allocation and entitlements. This is in contrast to the principle of ‘efficiency’ that forms the key consideration in establishment of an IRA. The integration of equity related considerations
in the otherwise efficiency-focused regulatory model can be seen as the outcome of
the ‘policy learning’ rather than coercive or mimetic diffusion. However, the law
also provides for creation of water markets, seen as a necessary institutional reform
for ensuring efficient water allocation. Water markets as the mechanism of efficient
water allocation is modeled around similar mechanisms existing in countries like
Australia and Chile. So although the incorporation of equity principle can be seen
as a process of policy learning the transplantation of market-based model for water
allocation can be seen as the outcome of coercive isomorphism.
The influence of the mechanism of ‘policy learning’ is found to be limited to the
substantive values that guide the functioning of the regulator, such as the incorporation of principle of equity. The overall structural features of the IRA, such as the
reliance on apex-level arm’s length regulatory bodies, still continues as the key feature of the water regulatory model. Hence, the debate around WRAs can be categorized into the ‘structural features’, i.e., the organizational structure related to
autonomy, and the ‘substantive values’, i.e., the principles that will guide the functioning of the regulatory.2 From the earlier discussion, it is found that mode of diffusion through policy learning is influential for determining the substantive values,
2

In the regulatory literature, the ‘structural features’ mentioned here is termed as ‘regulatory governance’ (Brown et al. 2006; Levy and Spiller 1994) and the ‘substantive values’ is termed as
‘regulatory substance’ (Brown et al. 2006) or ‘regulatory incentives or content’ (Levy and Spiller
1994).

 
98

S. Warghade

while the structural features of the IRA are largely influenced by the coercive and
mimetic mechanism of diffusion.
The combination of these diffusion mechanisms will lead to confusion. It represents a case of creation of an institution – originally meant for economic efficiency –
for the purpose of equity and other social goals. The problem is that IRA, while
regulating based on equity and other social goals, might end-up encroaching on the
patently political function associated with redistributive principle. Dubash and
Morgan, already warn about situations where adoption of models from the developed countries into developing countries might lead to dissonance in the regulatory
design (Dubash and Morgan 2013). This can be described as a mismatch of structure of regulatory governance (structural features) and regulatory substance or content (substantive values).3 The regulatory policy related to WRA points towards
such a dissonance, the root cause of which lies in the higher influence of coercive
and mimetic mechanism of policy diffusion as compared to the mechanism of policy learning.

6.4

Rationale for IRA in Water

The coercive and mimetic nature of the institutional transplantation has raised several concerns related to the relevance of the IRA model in the Indian context. The
rationale for an IRA in water sector in India is highly debated among scholars and
civil society actors (Prayas 2007; Warghade and Wagle 2013).
One of the important structural features of the IRA is that powers are delegated
to it without direct political control. So it becomes important to dwell on the question of the rationale for delegating powers to an IRA. There exists a detailed discussion in the international literature on the functional rationale for delegation to such
autonomous bodies (Thatcher and Stone Sweet 2002; Gilardi 2001, 2004, 2008;
Levy and Spiller 1994). One of the key arguments is related to the characteristics of
natural monopoly, seen in network-based utilities such as water and electricity. Due
to the economies of scale it is beneficial to have a single service provider in such
sectors. But this might lead to monopolist behavior by the service provider. Hence,
the government intervenes through regulation of various aspects of services such as
tariff, quality, and access. If government regulates by itself the private investors fear
that political uncertainty due to electoral and other compulsions might erode their
investments and future returns. In this situation, delegation to an independent, apolitical, and expert-based organization increases the credibility of the commitment
given by political representatives to the private investors. Thus, ‘credible commitment’ rationale is most prominent in situation of privatization of natural monopoly
sectors.

3

Using the terminology of ‘regulatory governance’ and ‘regulatory substance/ content’ as used by
Levy and Spiller (1994), and Brown et al. (2006).

 
6

Independent Regulatory Agencies in Water Sector in India: Debate and Discourse

99

In response to this, the scholars in India have argued that, in absence of largescale privatization of water utilities there is no case for an independent regulation in
water. Although water has the characteristics of natural monopoly, it is a resource
distinct from electricity and other such utility services. Hence, even the case for
privatization in water sector needs to be first developed and established before
accepting an independent regulatory model. Privatization should not be taken for
granted considering the unique features of water as a life-sustaining and ecological
resource (Prayas 2007).
This brings to light the problem of sequencing of policy and institutional reforms
in relation to creation of an IRA. The question is whether the substantive policy
framework precedes the creation of institutional form for giving effect to that policy.
One of the distinctive feature of regulatory reforms in developing countries is the
incomplete or absence of privatization in different sectors (Minogue and Carino
2006). In contrast to the post-privatization regulatory reforms seen in developed
countries, the regulatory reforms in developing countries, like creation of IRA, go
in tandem with the efforts to privatize the sectors. Hence, the institutional form (like
IRA) is created without an adequate discussion and debate on the policy decision to
privatize the sector. This aspect related to sequencing and timing of reforms has
created confusion related to the purpose and design of the regulatory. For example,
the Electricity Act of 2003 was a package comprising both the provision for allowing private sector investments and provisions for regulation by an IRA. This makes
the regulatory model of IRA as controversial as the privatization proposal. The
problem with this is that the rationale for IRA cannot be discussed irrespective of
the privatization policy. This limits the scope of discussion on the alternative forms
of regulation and rationale for IRA in a non-privatization scenario. Even in completely privatized sector like electricity, the IRAs are found to be regulating mainly
the state owned utilities because of absence of large-scale privatization. Hence, the
debate around the rationale for IRA needs to be widened beyond the privatization
paradigm.
A closer look into the legislations related to WRAs provides evidence of this
non-privatization scenario of regulation. Unlike the Electricity Act, the WRA laws
shun away from clearly providing for private sector participation. The first WRA
law in India, the MWRRA Act, in fact negates any such possibility even in future by
limiting the level of cost recovery from tariff to operation and maintenance cost.
Recovery of capital cost or fair returns on investment through water tariff is not a
possibility as per the existing provisions of the MWRRA Act. But at the same time,
the WRA law in Jammu and Kashmir, and Uttar Pradesh includes a provision for
licensing of water service providers without actually mentioning the word ‘private’
service providers. This shows the reluctance to clearly incorporate the privatization
agenda in the IRA laws and instead find out means to create spaces for privatization
in future. Scholars have argued that the WRAs in India seem to be the thin end of
the wedge of privatization (Prayas 2007).
It is important to note that, although the WRA laws shun away from incorporating the reforms for utility privatization there are several urban water service projects
undertaken for utility privatization. Similarly in irrigation, case of proposed dam

 
100

S. Warghade

privatization in Maharashtra was brought before the MWRRA. The government
department promoting the privatization was reluctant to bring the proposal under
the regulator’s purview. It was only after a petition filed against the process of privatization that the regulator finally issued an order for regulation of some aspects of
this privatization projects.4
Overall it is found that neither ‘regulation of privatization’ nor ‘regulation for
privatization’ seems to be the articulated rationale for WRAs in India. The ongoing
privatization initiatives in water sector are emerging as cases of ‘unregulated privatization’ even after creation of IRAs. This is emerging as one of the key features of
the regulatory reforms in water sector in India. This is also not a hybrid model
where the privatization process is regulated by a contract that is overseen by an
IRA.5
If privatization is not on the current agenda of creation of IRAs, the question of
the rationale for IRAs in water sector gets more complicated. One of the alternative
rationales is to overcome the ‘political uncertainty’ in policy areas requiring longterm vision and consistency (Warghade and Wagle 2013). The political uncertainty
arises due to the possibility of undue political intervention in the broader policy
direction and in the functioning of the state-owned utility. Uncertainty looms over
the continuity of the policies adopted by policy makers after change in the ruling
government. Partisan politics and politics of patronage are some of the factors that
contribute to the uncertainty. Various compulsions of electoral politics are at the
core of such political uncertainty.
Overcoming such political uncertainty could be one of the important rationales
for creation of IRA in water sector, especially for evolving and implementing longterm policy framework. Change in government might lead to change in water policies with the effect of absence of long-term, integrated, and consistent approach to
policy and its implementation. Delegating such policy functions to an IRA, which
works irrespective of the political functionaries, could be seen as a counter measure
to inconsistent and random changes in policy. Once the long-term vision and policy
framework is laid down through political and legislative route then the independent
regulatory could play an important role by distancing itself from the political and
executive wing of the government and focusing on bringing consistency and continuity in policy implementation. So the ‘credible commitment’ rationale, which was
found highly relevant for protecting private investors, is important for the sole reason of protecting public interest associated with achieving consistency in the
evolved long-term policy direction. However, this again is associated with the issue
of sequencing of policy and regulatory reforms. It is expected that the policy framework in form of the substantive principles is laid down before the choice of the regulatory institution is made.
4

Refer Case 1 of 2008 before MWRRA. For details of the petition refer to: Wagle, S., Warghade,
S. 2009. Independent Water Regulatory Authorities in India: Analysis and Interventions, Prayas:
Pune. Also refer the order by MWRRA on this petition available at: http://www.mwrra.org/
Order%20No.%201.pdf.
5
Refer Brown et al. (2006) for details on such hybrid models.

 
6

Independent Regulatory Agencies in Water Sector in India: Debate and Discourse

6.5

101

Substantive Values: Equity and Efficiency

Going beyond the privatization debate, scholars have argued that even if we accept
that a regulatory is necessary what is more important is the ‘normative framework’
that will guide the regulatory processes and decision making (Prayas 2007; Iyer
2009; Joy and Paranjape 2009). It is observed that there is no framework of guiding
principles in the existing water laws in India (Iyer 2009). Hence, developing such a
framework is important before deciding on the appropriate institutional structure
such as an independent regulator. It is in this context, that the recently drafted
‘National Water Framework Law’ becomes an important instrument that would provide the required normative principles for regulating water sector.6 While the process of enacting this national framework law is still in its nascent stage, there are
important insights to be gained by looking at the substantive principles that the
water regulatory laws and their implementation have espoused.
The WRA laws throw open the important debate around ‘equity Vs efficiency’.
Although the water regulatory laws do not clearly provide for privatization of water
services there are adequate evidences to show that genesis of the regulatory model
lies in the economic efficiency rationale (World Bank 2005). There are two contributing principles found in the WRA laws in this respect. First is the ‘cost recovery’
principle and other is the ‘efficient water allocation’ principle.

6.5.1

Cost Recovery Principle

Cost recovery through water tariff has not been an important issue on the agenda of
the policy makers in India. Water supply has been highly subsidized. Water charges
are largely determined based on political considerations rather than financial considerations. There was no legally mandatory provision for cost recovery. The WRA
laws in India for the first time are trying to institutionalize this principle by empowering the regulator to determine tariff based on cost recovery. For example, the
MWRRA is empowered to determine tariff based on recovery of cost of operations
and maintenance.
Experience of electricity regulation in India clearly shows that once the regulatory is delegated powers in this regard, tariff setting is undertaken periodically as a
routine procedure. Even after political interventions in the form of providing subsidies, the routine tariff determination process has led to gradual and consistent
increase in the average electricity tariff. A similar process will be established in the
water sector once the regulators begin the periodic tariff setting process. Even if
WRA laws currently cap the recovery level to operations and maintenance costs,

6

The draft law was produced by a group, constituted under the 12th Five Year Plan process, and
headed by Prof. Ramaswamy R Iyer http://www.planningcommission.nic.in/aboutus/committee/
wrkgrp12/wr/wg_wtr_frame.pdf.

 
102

S. Warghade

with the IRA law in Jammu and Kashmir adding cost of project, there is clear indication that tariff setting will become a routine and periodic process with higher
chances of gradual and consistent increase in water tariff. How the objectives of
equity and efficiency are addressed in such cases becomes highly important.
The experience of implementation of first such tariff regulatory process in
Maharashtra, initiated in 2007, has thrown light on several dimensions of the equity
and efficiency debate (Prayas 2013). Reduction of cross-subsidy in terms of higher
tariff charged to industrial water users as against other sectors, mainly agriculture,
is seen as an important regulatory policy for enhancing the efficiency of the sector.
In this process initiated by MWRRA, the initial attempts of reduction of crosssubsidy were highly objected to by water users during the regulatory consultations.
The active participation and concrete demands made by agriculture and domestic
water users resulted into a highly ‘social tariff system’ in Maharashtra. Affordability
and other social considerations have been accepted in the tariff formula along with
concessions accorded to various disadvantaged groups like tribal communities,
project affected people, small and marginal farmers, rural water users and others.
This shows how an independent regulatory process, when conducted in participatory manner, has the potential to tilt the debate towards equity. As the crosssubsidizers, mainly the industrial water users, start participating in the process the
demand for efficiency will also gradually come into the debate and there will be an
opportunity to reflect and arrive at the right balance of both the principles.

6.5.2

Efficient Water Allocation

In contrast to the experience in water tariff, the regulatory process around water
allocation in Maharashtra suggests a very different picture. As per the principal law
the MWRRA is empowered to determine water allocation. Through this legislation,
the political functionaries accorded powers to the regulator to determine allocations
based on the principle of equity. But the same political functionaries were found to
be bypassing the powers of the regulator by reallocating water from agriculture to
industrial use without due cognizance of the MWRRA Act. The principle of equity,
as provided in the law, was not followed while making these reallocation decisions.
When farmer groups and civil society organizations opposed the reallocation and
demanded adherence to the equity principle as given in the regulatory law, the political functionaries amended the law with the effect of revoking the equity principle
and also the related powers of the regulator (Wagle et al. 2012).
Data shows that huge amount of water was reallocated by the political functionaries to several industrial projects such as Special Economic Zones and private
power plants. In light of increasing water demands from urban-industrial sector and
the dwindling potential for increasing water availability, allocation of water will be
an important function in future that provides opportunity of wielding political clout
and power. The delegation of water allocation powers to an IRA seems to be a threat
perceived by the political functionaries. Thus, an IRA, that provided opportunity of

 
6

Independent Regulatory Agencies in Water Sector in India: Debate and Discourse

103

public participation in case of tariff determination, is not seen as an acceptable form
of institutional mechanism by the policy makers in case of a highly politicized issue
such as water allocation.
It should be noted that the economic efficiency principle, that drives regulatory
reforms, puts lot of emphasis on reallocation of water from lower to higher economic benefits. Hence, reallocation of water from agriculture to industrial use, done
by the political functionaries, goes well with this economic principle. But it raises
questions of due process and of consideration to equitable allocation of resources.
The reallocation process in Maharashtra was a closed-door political decision making instead and not transparent regulatory process as expected in the MWRRA Act.
According to the market principle accepted in the MWRRA Act, the process of
water reallocation was expected to be made operational through a system of tradable water entitlements. In such water market, the water entitlement holders can
engage in voluntary transactions with non-entitlement holders in return of an acceptable compensation. But before any such entitlement system could be established or
market could operate, huge amount of water is being reallocated through the political route without any consideration of the rights of the farmers. Any proposal for
water market, in such a situation, will accentuate inequities in water allocation created through this inadvertent and non-transparent political route of reallocations. It
will also accentuate inequities created in the past when landless and others disadvantaged sections were devoid of right to the water stored in the dams.
This discussion on water tariff and water allocation throws light on the complications associated with operationalizing regulatory principles. One of the central
debates is around the question of reconciling equity and efficiency. It also throws
light on the political power-play that will influence the regulatory space. Dubash
and Morgan rightly suggest that the intensity of redistributive politics will shape the
scope and nature of regulatory state in the developing countries (Dubash and
Morgan 2013). Unless these dimensions of the existing regulatory space in a developing country are adequately understood and assimilated in the regulatory design
the IRA models of regulation will remain ineffective.

6.6

Depoliticization through Expertocratic Regulatory
Process

The rise of the regulatory state also signals the rise of expert-oriented deliberations
and decision making. As seen from the ‘credible commitment’ rationale, depoliticizing the decision making process is achieved by delegating powers to arms’ length
bodies such as IRA. Concerns are raised by civil society actors that this will lead to
complete de-politicization of sectoral policy making (Prayas 2007). This concern is
highly relevant in a developing country context where there is a large section of the
society which may not be able to participate in such expertocratic decision making
processes. The concerns and demands of these sections would be neglected for want
of voice and concrete evidences. Mobilizing analysis-based evidences will be a

 
104

S. Warghade

major hurdle for such sections to get a sound hearing in the regulatory proceedings.
This brings to light an important aspect related to accountability of the autonomous
regulator, especially towards the voiceless sections of the society.
There are several mechanisms created for this purpose in different models of
autonomous regulation. The most direct mechanism is the official appointment of
‘consumer representatives’ in the state electricity commissions in India for protection of public interest.7 The consumer representatives in this case have been empowered to receive all information pertaining to regulatory processes and also to
participate and intervene in all regulatory proceedings. Another set of conditions
that make the decision making favorable for pro-poor and pro-people interventions
is operationalization of principles of transparency, accountability and public participation (Nakhooda et al. 2007). Such procedural matters contribute to what is termed
as ‘procedural accountability’ of IRAs (Dubash 2008).
The analysis of the WRA laws in India shows that these aspects of ‘procedural
accountability’ have not been incorporated adequately (Wagle and Warghade 2010).
For example, there is provision for public participation while determining tariff.
This helped in ensuring active participation of stakeholders in the tariff proceedings
initiated by MWRRA. But there is no provision for public participation in MWRRA
Act in the crucial function of determination of water allocation. Apart from members of MWRRA, there is provision in the law for appointment of ‘special invitees’
representing different regions of the state. But these invitees do not anywhere
resemble the likes of consumer representatives. There are hardly any concrete propeople or pro-poor interventions done by these invitees that might have influenced
the regulatory actions and decision in the past.
Unless strong transparency and accountability provisions are made in the regulatory law it is not possible to avert the situation of complete depoliticization of sectoral decisions. An associated concern raised in this regard is the possibility of
‘regulatory capture’, a widely studied and discussed theory in the regulatory literature (Dubash 2008). Depoliticization and expertocratic procedures provide avenues
for capturing of the decision making process by the intellectual and resourceful
stakeholders like corporate entities. Because the avenues for political mobilization
are reduced, the poor and disadvantaged sections will remain marginalized in such
regulatory decision making process. Who will then represent the interest of these
groups in the expert-oriented regulatory process, is a major concern that need serious consideration in the regulatory design. Measures to enhance the ‘procedural
accountability’ form an important counter measure to thwart attempts of regulatory
capture.

7
Refer the Electricity Act 2003 (Source: http://powermin.nic.in/acts_notification/electricity_
act2003/preliminary.htm).

 
6

Independent Regulatory Agencies in Water Sector in India: Debate and Discourse

6.7

105

Way Ahead

Independent regulation in the water sector is still in its experimental phase in India.
The debates arising from the design and implementation of the water regulatory
models in India have raised serious questions on the appropriateness of the model.
This reflects on the peculiar nature of the regulatory state in the developing countries. It also reflects on the peculiar nature of water as a distinct resource. There is
certainly a need to relook at the existing models and evolve more context-friendly
models instead of just transplanting context-free models.
The literature provides some alternative directions with regard to regulatory
models. The independent regulatory is an apex-body overlooking the whole of the
sector. Such an apex-level institutional structure combined with its expert-oriented
proceedings creates a tendency towards centralization of decision making. Such a
‘centered’ model of regulation is being challenged by several regulatory scholars.
Most prominent work in this regard is the theory of ‘regulatory space’ proposed by
Hancher and Moran (1989) (Scott 2001). The authors use the metaphor of space to
suggest that regulation is shaped not by a single power-center, like an IRA, but is
shaped by multiple stakeholders active in a regulatory space. The regulatory power
in the space is dispersed and not concentrated. The regulatory space is further
shaped by the context that exists in given place and time. The interface and interactions among various organizations is the key in understanding regulation and its
outcomes. This leads us to a ‘decentered’ approach to regulation (Black 2002).
The decentered approach to regulation is a potential alternative approach for a
developing country like India where the democratic set-up and the structural features of inequity demands for more and more decentralization of power. The evidences of this can be seen in the model bill drafted by a group constituted by
Planning Commission of India on behalf of the 12th Five-Year Plan.8 The group
comprised representatives of governmental and non-governmental organizations.
The draft bill, which is the outcome of this consultative process, resembles the
decentered approach. It envisages a decentered regulatory space where regulatory
power is not concentrated in an apex-level IRA. It recognizes and attempts to balance the multiple sources of regulatory power, held among the political functionaries, regulatory bodies, expert bodies and water users’ organizations.
The implications of such a model can be two fold. One, it can provide appropriate spaces and opportunities for the disadvantaged sections to influence the regulatory process. Second, it will ensure that the political functionaries do not get a free
hand on making decisions in a closed-door manner. The balance of power among
stakeholders combined with the detailed process guidelines given in the model bill
could serve as the step towards evolving a context-friendly decentered regulatory
model. However, considering the complex web of regulatory stakeholders and

8

Refer ‘The Model Bill for State Water Regulatory System Act, 2011’. The relevant document can
be accessed on the following link: http://planningcommission.nic.in/aboutus/committee/wrkgrp12/wr/mb_wtrgrnd_181011.pdf.

 
106

S. Warghade

processes that the bill proposes, there is a need for moderation of some of the aspects
of the bill while adapting the same to specific state-level context. This moderation
is necessary to reduce the administrative and regulatory burden that might make it
infeasible to operate on ground.
Another arena to look for alternative models is the ‘sunshine commission’ model
originally developed and practiced by Charles Adams, one of the earliest thinkers
on regulation in USA (MCraw 1984). In the 1870s, Charles Adams pioneered the
thought of a very different form of independent regulation which he called ‘sunshine commission’. Adams argued that continuous learning and knowledge building
on a particular sector is not possible at the level of the legislatures because of their
short tenures in a particular sector of governance. There is a need for a permanent
and independent analytical expertise within the government which can be developed through an independent commission.
Apart from undertaking study and disclosure, Adams emphasized on the role of
regulator “as sort of lens by means of which the otherwise scattered rays of public
opinion could be concentrated to focus and brought to bear upon a given point”
(MCraw 1984, p. 15). He proposed a ‘Sunshine Commission’ which would “shed
the cleansing light of disclosure on the hitherto secret affairs of business corporations” (ibid). Discouraging direct intervention through tariff setting, Adams emphasized on regulation through publication and disclosure. Enlightenment was seen as
an essential prelude to action. Avoiding the confrontationist approach in regulation,
Adams followed the strategy of enlightment, assistance, and prodding in the
Massachusetts Board of Railroad Commissioners (1869), the first important IRA in
USA which Adams not only founded but also worked as its Chairperson. Moving
away from this ‘sunshine’ approach the later commissions in USA engaged more
directly through tariff setting and other regulatory functions. Adams warned that
such a higher engagement will entangle the regulatory into controversies and redtapism around rate and other regulatory interventions. This will be at the cost of
losing out on the larger role of bringing the “interests of the public and corporation
into identity” (ibid).
Considering the diversity in conception of water as a resource and the plurality
of values attached to water in India, the idea of the ‘cleansing light’ of knowledge
and a lens for bringing together the ‘scattered rays of public opinion’ to focus on
key common interests, seems to be worth exploring. There are several government
authorities engaged in data collection and dissemination but the approach is far
from Adams ‘sunshine commission’. The notion of water as a common resource
and the process of evolving a common interest that could drive policy and regulation
cannot be institutionalized without a facilitative role of such a commission. This
brings in focus the argument developed by Dubash and Morgan on regulatory models as the potential harbingers of ‘repoliticization’ mainly due to their procedural
component (Dubash and Morgan 2013). A decentered approach, with a strong
knowledge component (sunshine commission), and backed by a pro-people normative framework may be a good starting point for building an effective and comprehensive alternative framework for water regulation in India.

 
6

Independent Regulatory Agencies in Water Sector in India: Debate and Discourse

107

References
Black, J. (2002). Critical reflections on regulation (Discussion paper, 4). London: LSE Centre for
the Analysis of Risk and Regulation.
Brown, A. C., Stern, J., Tenenbaum, B., & Gencer, D. (2006). Handbook for evaluating infrastructure regulatory systems. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Dubash, N. (2008). Independent regulatory agencies: A theoretical review with reference to electricity and water in India. Economics and Political Weekly, 43(40), 43, 46–54.
Dubash, N., & Morgan, B. (2012). Understanding the rise of the regulatory state of the south.
Regulation and Governance, 6(3), 261–281.
Dubash, N., & Morgan, B. (Eds.). (2013). The rise of the regulatory state of the south: Infrastructure
and development in emerging economies. Oxford: OUP.
Estache, A., & Goicoechea, A. (2005). A “Research” database on infrastructure economic performance (World Bank policy research working paper, 3643). Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Gilardi, F. (2001). Principal-agent models go to Europe: Independent regulatory agencies as ultimate step of delegation. Paper presented at the ECPR general conference, Canterbury, 6–8 Sept
2001.
Gilardi, F. (2004). Institutional change in regulatory policies: Regulation through independent
agencies and the three new institutionalisms. In J. Jordana & D. Levi-Faur (Eds.), The politics
of regulation: Institutions and regulatory reforms for the age of governance. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar.
Gilardi, F. (2008). Delegation in the regulatory state: Independent regulatory agencies in Western
Europe. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Hancher, L., & Moran, M. (1989). Organizing regulatory space. In L. Hancher & M. Moran (Eds.),
Capitalism, culture and regulation. Oxford: Clarendon.
Iyer, R. (Ed.). (2009). Water and the laws in India. New Delhi: Sage.
Jordana, J., Levi-Faur, D., & Fernándezimarín, X. (2011). The global diffusion of regulatory agencies: Channels of transfer and stages of diffusion. Comparative Political Studies, 44(10),
1343–1369.
Joy, K. J., & Paranjape, S. (2009). Water use: Legal and institutional framework. In R. Iyer (Ed.),
Water and the laws in India (pp. 213–250). New Delhi: Sage.
Levy, B., & Spiller, P. (1994). The institutional foundations of regulatory commitment: A comparative analysis of telecommunication regulation. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization,
10(2), 201–246.
Majone, G. (1994). The rise of the regulatory state in Europe. West European Politics, 17(3),
77–101.
Majone, G. (1997). From the positive to the regulatory state. Journal of Public Policy, 17(2),
139–67.
McCraw, T. (1984). Prophets of regulation: Charles Francis Adams, Louis D. Brandeis, James
M. Landis, Alfred E. Kahn. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Minogue, M., & Carino, L. (Eds.). (2006). Regulatory governance in developing countries.
Manchester: Edward Elgar.
Moran, M. (2002). Review article: Understanding the regulatory state. British Journal of Political
Science, 32(1–24), 391–413.
Nakhooda, S., Dixit, S., & Dubash, N. (2007). Empowering people: A governance analysis of
electricity. Washington, DC: World Resources Institute and Prayas.
Peters, G. (1999). Institutional theory in political science: The new institutionalism. New York:
Pinter.
Prayas. (2007). Regulation and the poor in electricity & water sectors. Proceedings of national
conference, New Delhi, 12–13 July 2007, http://prayaspune.org/peg/jupgrade110313/index.
php?option=com_k2&view=item&id=68&Itemid=10
Prayas. (2013). The Maharashtra tariff story: Report of the first independent regulatory process on
tariff in India. Pune: Prayas.

 
108

S. Warghade

Scott, C. (2001). Analysing regulatory space: Fragmented resources and institutional design.
Public Law, Summer, 282–305.
Thatcher, M., & Stone Sweet, A. (2002). Theory and practice of delegation to non-majoritarian
institutions. West European Politics, 25(1), 1–22.
Wagle, S., & Warghade, S. (2010). New laws establishing independent regulatory agencies in the
Indian water sector: Long term implications for governance. South Asian Water Studies, 2(1),
49–77.
Wagle, S., Warghade, S., & Sathe, M. (2012). Exploiting policy obscurity for legalizing water
grabbing in the era of economic reform: The case of Maharashtra, India. Water Alternatives,
5(2), 412–430.
Warghade, S. (2013). Politics and policy analysis tools: Separation or integration? The case of
water allocation policy and tariff regulation in India. Paper presented at policy formulation
tool workshop, London, 18–19 Apr 2013.
Warghade, S., & Wagle, S. (2013). Independent regulatory bodies in the water sector: Issues and
prospects. Paper presented in the felicitation conference “Water Sector in India: A Critical
Engagement” in honour of Prof. Ramaswamy Iyer, New Delhi, 25–27 Nov 2013.
Warghade, S., & Wagle, S. (2014). Need for reforming the reform: Incompatibility and usurpation
of water sector reform in the Indian state of Maharashtra. In V. Narain, C. Goodrich, J. Chourey,
& A. Prakash (Eds.), Globalization of water governance in South Asia (pp. 159–175).
Routledge: New Delhi.
World Bank. (2005). India’s water economy: Bracing for a turbulent future (Report No. 34750IN). Washington, DC: World Bank

 
Chapter 7

River Linking Project: A Solution or Problem
to India’s Water Woes?
Tushaar Shah and Upali A. Amarasinghe

Abstract The public discourse on the National River Linking Project (NRLP) has
been hopelessly lopsided—with the protagonists of the project unable to take on the
antagonists on either their rhetoric or their analytics. This paper contributes to the
discourse by presenting a balanced analytical point of view from a series of studies
conducted by the International Water Management Institute and its partners. The
studies have analyzed the drivers and assumptions used to justify the NRLP and
have assessed hydrological, financial and social implications of the NRLP water
transfers. These studies find that the underlying assumptions have either changed
over time or have flaws and alternative options are not given the consideration these
need and deserve. Given these and many other factors, the hydrological, financial
and social benefits and cost, if implemented in its present form, are mixed. However,
the paper also argues that the idea of NRLP may have come a decade or two soon;
and that a slew of upcoming contingencies shall not only change the tenor of the
debate around inter-basin water transfers but even make a compelling case for them,
even if in a different form than the present proposal.
Keywords River linking project • NRLP • River basin • Water transfers • Storage •
Irrigation • Groundwater

7.1

Introduction

For a long period, the notables in India have argued that the answer to the droughtproneness of western and peninsular India lies in the flood-proneness of the east,
and vice versa. Few grand proposals of linking rivers evoked the imagination and
T. Shah (*)
IWMI-India Water Policy Program, International Water Management Institute,
“Jal Tarang”, Smruti Park, B/H IRMA, Anand, Gujarat 388001, India
e-mail: t.shah@cgiar.org
U.A. Amarasinghe
International Water Management Institute, Hyderabad, India
e-mail: u.amarasinghe@cgiar.org
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
V. Narain, A. Narayanamoorthy (eds.), Indian Water Policy
at the Crossroads: Resources, Technology and Reforms,
Global Issues in Water Policy 16, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-25184-4_7

109

 
110

T. Shah and U.A. Amarasinghe

enthusiasm of water stressed Indians from time to time. At the forefront were,
Sir Arthur Cotton’s plan of linking rivers in southern India in the nineteenth century,
Dr K. L. Rao’s plan of linking Ganga and Cauvery in the 1970s, and Captain
Dastur’s plan of lateral Himalayan canal linking Ravi and Brahmaputra and an
interconnected Garland Canal girdling peninsular in the later seventies. In addition,
the latest is the grandiose scheme to link Himalayan rivers and river in peninsular
India—those currently under discussion as National River Linking Project (NRLP).
In the early 1990s, the National Water Development Agency (NWDA) was entrusted
to start detailed planning for a mega-scheme of NRLP under the national perspective plan for water resources development (NWDA 2012a).
Implementing mega-schemes, which require pre-feasibility, feasibility, and environment impact studies, is a long drawn out process. Many proposals do not even go
beyond the drawing board, as the planners themselves dismiss ideas as too grandiose. Nevertheless, in 2003, acting on public interest petitions, the Supreme Court of
India has decided that the time had come for the nation to pull its act together on the
waterfront, and enjoined the Government of India to complete all planning required
to complete the NRLP by 2016. President Abdul Kalam too endorsed the idea and
vigorously argued that the government should plunge headlong in its implementation without wasting time unduly in studies.
The ruling National Democratic Alliance government at that time—constituted a
high-powered, multi-disciplinary task force to embark upon the NRLP project
forthwith in deference to the Supreme Court’s injunction. However, a groundswell
of opposition to the project emerged from environmental groups and civil society
organizations with a battery of arguments representing a variety of perspectives.
Most of these did not even address the benefit-cost issues but questioned the basic
model of water resources planning and management through large-scale dams and
canal networks (‘the disease of gigantism’, as one antagonist referred to it) that the
NRLP exemplified (Alagh et al. 2006). The interest in the project has waned since
then, or at least placed in the back burner until the next major nation-wide drought.
The idea of linking Himalayan Rivers with peninsular and western ones has however proved hard to kill. Like phoenix, it rose from its ashes again in 2012, when the
Supreme Court took note of it suo moto, and based largely on an economic analysis
by the National Council for Applied Economic Research (NCAER 2008), again
enjoined the government to implement the project so as to complete it by 2016!
(Venkatesan 2012). The NCAER study showed NRLP’s economic benefits will
exceed its costs, but it is not clear whether the battery of assumptions would hold
under intense scrutiny. Once again, the civil society started to express anxiety of the
Supreme Court decision (Iyer 2012; Narain 2012). The responses of the Government
of India to the second Supreme Court decision and on people’s concerns are not
clear yet.
Against this backdrop, this paper discusses major assumptions and implications
of NRLP water transfers on Indian water, land and social scape. After this brief
introduction, the next section, on the NRLP project, gives a brief technical overview
of the project concept. Section 7.3 titled, Justification of the NRLP, discusses
the economic and social justification of the project as advanced by the

 
7

River Linking Project: A Solution or Problem to India’s Water Woes?

111

NWDA. Section 7.4, Analyses of Core Assumptions, critique the core assumptions
behind the large project. Section 7.5, The Implication of NRLP Water Transfers,
assesses the implications of implementing such a large project. The final section
discusses under what contingencies a project like NRLP would be required to
address India’s water woes and their implications on policy and research.

7.2
7.2.1

The NRLP Project
Himalayan and Peninsular Component

The NRLP intends to transfer water from surplus river basins to ease the water
shortages in western and southern India, while mitigating the impacts of recurrent
floods in eastern India (NWDA 2012a). Conceptualized in two components,
Himalayan and Peninsular (Fig. 7.1), the project will build 30 link canals and
approximately 3,000 storages to connect 37 Himalayan and Peninsular rivers. The
canals, which are planned to be 50–100 m wide and more than 6 m deep, will handle
178 billion cubic meters (BCM) of inter-basin water transfer/per year. The
Himalayan and Peninsular components will transfer 33 and 141BCM of water
respectively, through a combined network of close to 15,000 km long distributary
canals.
The Himalayan Component, with 16 river links, has two sub-components one
linking Ganga, Brahmaputra and Mahanadi Basins (links 11–14 in Fig. 7.1), and the
other comprising links between eastern Ganga tributaries and Chambal and
Sabarmati river basins (links 1–10). Altogether, these transfers intend to mitigate
floods in the eastern parts of the Ganga Basin, and provide the western parts of the
basin with improved irrigation and water supplies. The Himalayan component
needs several large dams in Bhutan and Nepal to store and transfer floodwaters from
the tributaries of the Ganga and Brahmaputra rivers, and within India to transfer the
surplus waters of the Mahanadi and Godavari rivers.
The peninsular component, with 14 major links has four sub-components: (1)
linking the Mahanadi-Godavari-Krishna-Cauvery-Vaigai Rivers; (2) linking west
flowing rivers that are south of Tapi and north of Bombay; (3) linking the KenBetwa and Parbati-Kalisindh-Chambal rivers; and (4) diverting the flow in some of
the west flowing rivers to the eastern side. The en route irrigation under the peninsular
component will serve a substantial area as proposed under the NRLP, and much
these beneficiary lands are in arid and semi-arid western and peninsular India.
The ‘back-of-the-envelope calculations’, the best available so far, suggest that
the project will altogether cost about US$ 123 billion (or Indian Rs. 560,000 crore)
at 2000 prices. This includes US$ 23 billion (In Rs. 106,000 crore) for the peninsular component, US$ 41 billion (Rs. 185,000 crore) for the Himalayan component
and US$ 59 billion (In Rs. 269,000 crore) for the hydroelectric component. Given
that India’s Wholesale Price Index in 2012 is 120 % higher than in 2000, the project
cost at current prices would be more like Rs. 1.19 trillion (US$ 216 billion).

 
112

T. Shah and U.A. Amarasinghe

Fig. 7.1 Links of the Himalayan and peninsular components (Source: IWMI (2008))

NWDA claims the project will add 34 G watts (GW) of hydropower capacity,
which includes 4 and 30 GW from the peninsular and Himalayan components
respectively. Approximately 3,700 MW would be required to lift water across major
watershed ridges by up to 116 m. It also adds 35 million hectares to India’s irrigated
areas, and generates an unknown volume of navigation and fishery benefits (NWDA
2012a). One worry with these numbers is their reliability. Water infrastructure plans
in India are often exaggerate estimates of likely benefits and under-estimate costs,
making them appear highly desirable. As projects unroll, the actual benefits turn out
much smaller and costs much higher than shown in the planning documents.

7.2.2

Grandiosity of the NRLP

The NRLP is unique in its unrivalled grandiosity. If fully implemented, it could be
the largest water infrastructure project ever undertaken in the world. The NRLP will
handle four times more water than China’s South to North water transfer project,
which is one of the largest inter-basin water transfer projects implemented in the
world at present (Stone and Jia 2006). The NRLP will also handle four times more
water than the Three Gorges Dam; five times all the inter-basin water transfers

 
7

River Linking Project: A Solution or Problem to India’s Water Woes?

113

completed in the U.S.A; and six times more than the total transfer of the six interbasin water transfers projects already operational in India namely, Sharda-Sahayak;
Beas-Sutlej; Madhopur-Beas Link; Kurnool- Cudappa-Cana; Periyar- Vegai Link;
and Telgu Ganga.
The cost of the NRLP could be three times the cost of China’s South–north water
transfers scheme, six times the cost of Three Gorges Project, and twenty times the
estimated costs of the Red-Dead connection in the Middle East. The project will
require a larger investment than the sum total of all irrigation investments made by
the governments of colonial and free India since 1830. The actual cost could most
likely be several times more than the present US$ 123 billion ‘guest estimate’, when
it considers the cost of land acquisition and rehabilitation and resettlement.
Although enjoined to complete by 2016, the way irrigation projects in India have
proceeded during recent decades, general agreement is that this grandiose project
may not fully complete even by 2050. Varghese (2003) suggests, realistically, that
NRLP could be a 50–100 year project. Only nine of the 30 proposed links are independent and can be constructed and operated without the other links. In the first
stage of the Project, which won government approval, a 230-km canal will transfer
water from the Ken River to the Betwa River in the northern Madhya Pradesh. A
dam and small hydroelectric plant in the Ken River will be located in the Panna
Tiger Reserve. Work on the first component of this US$ 1.1 billion project is underway, and will alone take 8 years to complete (Bagla 2006).

7.3
7.3.1

Justification of the NRLP
Augmenting Utilizable Water Supply

The raisons d’être of the project is the accentuating water scarcity in western and
peninsular India, low storage capacity and per capita utilizable water supply, high
spatial and temporal variability of rainfall and the associated droughts and floods.
In India’s 19 major river basins, only 55 % of the total renewable water resources
(TRWR) are utilizable (GOI 1999). The Ganga-Brahmaputra-Meghna basins, which
cover one third of the country’s total land area, are home to 44 % of India’s population, but drain more than 60 % of the country’s TRWR. The Brahmaputra sub-basin
alone drains 31 % of the TRWR, but due to geographical restrictions, only 4 % of
the TRWR are potentially utilizable. In contrast, the Krishna, Cauvery and, Penner
river basins and few other eastward flowing rivers cover 16 % of the land area, host
17 % of the population, but drain only 6 % of total water resources.
Due to this spatial variability of water supply, more than 200 million people have
per capita utilizable water supply below 1,000 m3/day, which, according to
Falkenmark et al. (1989), indicates severe regional water scarcity. Due to overdevelopment, some basins are physically water-scarce (Amarasinghe et al. 2005).
One of the solutions suggested to deal with increasing water scarcity, is augmenting

 
114

T. Shah and U.A. Amarasinghe

the utilizable water supply of water scarce basins by transferring waters from surplus basins.
Low reservoir storage capacity is another concern. At present, it is only 200 m3
per person at present. These result in economic water scarcity, which, many fear,
will impede economic growth. In comparison, other arid and semi-arid regions of
the world have invested heavily in storage creation; Brazil, Australia and the U.S.A,
have per capita storage capacity of 3,388, 4,717 and 5,961 m3 respectively. Even
China has increased its per capita storage capacity to 2,486 m3. For this, and the fact
that variability of rainfall is increasing due to climate change, many consider that it
is imperative that India increases its storage for regulating the vast amount of runoff
that otherwise cannot be beneficially utilized. The proposed NRLP water transfers
will increase utilizable surface water resources by an estimated 25 % and improve
water availability in water-scarce regions.
Flood and droughts inflict heavy damages. Annual floods, on average, affect
more than 7 million ha of the total land area, 3 million ha of the cropped area and
34 million people, mostly in the eastern parts. Floods inflict an annual damage of
well over US$ 220 million (Rs. 1,000 crores) (GOI 1999). In contrast, recurrent
droughts affect 19 % of the country, 68 % of the cropped area and 12 % of the population (Nair and Radhakrishna 2005). Reservoir storages and the canal diversions in
NRLP would, it is argued, reduce flood damages by 35 % (Sinha et al. 2005) and
ease drought-proneness in semi-arid and arid parts. Also, NRLP will make 12 km3
of water available for domestic and industrial sectors in these drought-prone districts. Many argue that diverting a portion of the surplus floodwater from the
Himalayan Rivers into the drought-prone areas can only be a win-win proposition
for the country.

7.3.2

Meeting Food Self Sufficiency

Self-sufficiency in food grains is a key plank of the NRLP justification. Lay circles
consider that the report by the National Commission of Integrated Water Resources
Development (GOI 1999) as the first cut justification of the NRLP’s design-concept.
Assuming the criticality of maintaining national food self-sufficiency and agricultural exports, the Commission projected a grain demand in the range of 425–494
million tonnes for India by 2050 and argued for the need to increase the country’s
irrigation potential to 160 million ha, which is 20 million more than what can be
achieved without basin transfers (NWDA 2012b). The surface irrigation from NRLP
alone is expected to add 25 million ha of irrigated land.
Improving rural employment is another justification for the NRLP. The rural
population in India will peak at about 775 million by 2015 (UN 2004). The
Commission projected that the rural population will decrease to about 610 million
by 2050, but assumes that a large part of the rural population will remain agriculturally active in the future.

 
7

River Linking Project: A Solution or Problem to India’s Water Woes?

7.4
7.4.1

115

Analyses of Core Assumptions
Demographic Change

Changes in demography are critical to NRLP food and water demand projections.
The NCIWRD projected the state-wise population growth by pro-rata distribution
of national population projections from the 1991 population census. However, the
new regional projections (Mahmood and Kundu 2009) incorporating age-size structure, HIV/AIDS and adjusted fertility and mortality estimates from the 2001 census,
show vastly different emerging patterns. Although the total national population projections are not different, new projections show that many water scarce states,
including Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, Punjab, and Tami Nadu will have
appreciable decline in population trends before 2050. Haryana, Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Orissa and the West Bengal too will experience a moderate decline, while Uttar
Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh will show an increase
in population. Thus, unlike in the NLRP assumptions, the latter group of states—
which are to cede water to southern and western states—is where pressure for farmlands and demand for irrigation will continue to be high.
Rural employment was a major driver of India’s past irrigation development, the
fact that NCIWRD has also emphasized. However, according Sharma and Bhaduri
(2009), today’s younger generation in Indian villages has different perception and
priorities. There is a high likelihood that today’s young rural farmers will move out
of agriculture, or at least keep it as a secondary income activity, regardless of
increased access to irrigation. This is more evident among rural youth who have
different skills and better education. The tendency of moving out of agriculture is
higher where the distance to travel to town or urban centers is less. Certainly, future
generations of India will be more educated, and will be acquainted with better skills.
In addition, many rural centers will become small towns and towns to sprawling
urban centers. Infrastructure facilities such as access to roads, electricity, and telecommunication are also increasing. Thus, migration from full time agriculture to
non-farm rural and urban livelihood will increase; especially in economically more
dynamic states where NRLP proposes to transfer Himalayan water.

7.4.2

Food Self Sufficiency

The NCIWRD has projected that India will have to produce 450 million MT (or
284 kg/person/year) of food grains by 2050, and an additional 45 million MT for
feed, seed and waste. However, Amarasinghe et al. (2007) have shown significant
changes in food consumption patterns over the recent decades. Because of these
changes, India’s total grain demand shall increase from 217 million MT in 2000 to
about 380 million MT by 2050. This projection includes the feed grain demand of

 
116

T. Shah and U.A. Amarasinghe

120 million MT, which is a tenfold increase from the present levels, a factor that the
NCIWRD study has significantly underestimated. Even then, the projections of
Amarasinghe et al. study (2007) s fall short of the commission’s projection by 115
million MT.
The Commission also assumed that self-sufficiency in food grains as a major
driver of irrigation cropping patterns and water demand. The self-sufficiency
assumption was based on three concerns: (1) India has a large population and food
grain is the staple food, so, no major deficits are acceptable; (2) Agriculture is the
main driver of economic growth and contributes to a large share of the GDP; and (3)
India’s foreign exchange reserves are too low to permit large scale imports of food
grains. However, all three reasons are no longer valid in a rapidly growing India:
food consumption patterns are fast changing, agriculture sector contribution to GDP
is rapidly decreasing; foreign exchange reserve is increasing; and imports and
exports, even in the agriculture sector, are growing (Malik 2009). The only concern
that demands a significant level of self-sufficiency is that large grain imports from a
country of India’s size could potentially impact world prices and hurt the very consumer that imports are expected to help feed.

7.4.3

Yield Growth

Many argue that the Commission took an unduly bleak view of the potential to
increase food grain yields. The Commission assumed average grain yield to increase
from 1.5 tonnes/ha in 1993 to 3.1 tonnes/ha by 2050. However, if India can double the
land and water productivities (1.67 tonnes/ha and 0.48 kg/m3 of consumptive water
use in 2000) in 50 years, it can not only be self-sufficient but also will not require any
additional irrigated land or withdrawals for food grains (Amarasinghe et al. 2010).
The moot question is: will India be unable to increase its average grain yield to
4.0 tonnes/ha, which is the present level of China, even over a 50-year period?
Research suggests that a significant potential exists for larger yield growth. There is
significant variation in yield even within a same irrigation system or in the same
region growing similar crops (Kumar et al. 2009) or in regions of similar consumptive water use (Amarasinghe et al. 2010). Increasing the reliability of irrigation and
increasing the application of inputs can significantly increase grain yields in irrigation
areas. Sharma et al. (2010) showed that even small doses of supplemental irrigation
during critical periods of crop growth can double the productivity in the rainfed areas.

7.4.4

Future of Irrigation

The NCIWRD’s prognosis for how India’s future of irrigation shapes up is the most
contentious. The composition of surface water and groundwater area in 1993 was
55 % and 45 % of the gross irrigated area. The Commission assumed surface

 
7

River Linking Project: A Solution or Problem to India’s Water Woes?

117

irrigation would be the dominant form of irrigation by 2050, and the composition of
net irrigated area will reverse by 2050. However, the developments in recent decades
show a completely opposite trend (Fig. 7.2). There has been no appreciable increase
in surface irrigated area in India, although, due largely to private small-scale investments, the groundwater irrigated area has recorded a rapid growth.
Today, net groundwater irrigated area is 39 million ha, which constitutes 63 % of
the net irrigated area, and contributes to 64 % of the gross irrigated area. It is therefore, largely due to this increase in groundwater irrigation that India has achieved in
2000 the projected gross irrigated area of 79 million ha for the year 2010. But, the
sustainability of these trends depends on how far groundwater irrigation can grow
without any surface irrigation growth?
Many contend that increase in groundwater irrigation is not possible without
surface irrigation recharge. But a substantial part of groundwater irrigated area
growth in the last decade took place in districts outside the command areas (Shah
et al. 2003) and showed no significant spatial dependence on surface irrigation
growth (Bhaduri et al. 2009). The analysis by Amarasinghe et al. (2008) shows that
if the 10 million ha of net surface irrigated area from the projects under construction
and another 25–35 million ha of net groundwater irrigated area are added to the
present level of irrigation, the gross irrigated area will increase to about 130 to 140
million ha. This is the area required for achieving the Commission’s exaggerated
projections of, and the self-sufficiency targets of grains. With this increase, groundwater irrigation by 2050 will cover more than 70 % of the gross irrigated area. Such
a change will significantly reduce the total surface irrigation demand due to differ-

42
36

200
30
150

24
18

100

12
50
6

Net irrigated area(million ha)

Expenditure (Billion USD in 2005 prices)

Public expenditure in major and medium irrigation and net irrigated area
250

0

0
1961

1966

1971

1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

Expenditure-major and medium irrigation

Net irrigated area-canals

Net irrigated area-tanks

Net irrigated area-groundwater

Fig. 7.2 Trends of public expenditure in major and medium irrigation and net irrigated area from
different sources in India (Sources: Public expenditure data are from the Central Water Commission,
Ministry of Water resources, Government of India (accessible via http://cwc.gov.in/main/webpages/statistics.html)). Net irrigated areas under different sources are from the Ministry of
Agriculture, Government of India (accessible via the http://dacnet.nic.in/eands/)

 
118

T. Shah and U.A. Amarasinghe

ences of efficiencies between surface irrigation (60 %) and GW irrigation (75 %).
But, can these optimistic assumptions on irrigation efficiency increase be realized
by 2050? Can Managed Aquifer Recharge (MAR) in a decentralized format enable
India to use its aquifers as large-scale storages in place of surface storages? These
are critical questions for India’s water future.

7.4.5

Irrigation Efficiency

The Commission assumed a significant increase in irrigation efficiencies—from
35–40 % now to 60 % in the future for surface irrigation, and from 65 %–70 % to
75 % for groundwater irrigation across all the river basins. The little information we
have today on the variation of irrigation efficiency across river basins is not adequate to predict future directions. However, they show that groundwater irrigation
efficiency is already close to or even higher than the commission’s projections
(Kumar et al. 2009). But the surface irrigation efficiency has shown virtually no
increase over the recent decades.
It is also clear that many water saving technologies, especially micro-irrigation
systems, can significantly increase water use efficiency. Narayanamoorthy (2009)
showed that the efficiencies of sprinkler and drip irrigation systems range from
75 % to 90 %. And, more than 70 million ha of land can potentially benefit from
micro-irrigation. Many of these technologies are more easily adopted by groundwater irrigators than canal irrigators. This too may work in favor of larger contribution
from groundwater to India’s food self-sufficiency.
Many water-scarce river basins approaching high degrees of closure as there are
no flows to the sea on many days of the year. In these basins, projected application
efficiencies of surface irrigation are low, but they have high basin efficiency due to
reuse of the return flows of irrigation. Thus increasing irrigation efficiency in one
location, and then using the saved water for new locations or for other purposes,
would certainly affect some other water users elsewhere. We need to know more on
the interactions of efficiencies at the system and basin levels before we can make
firm statements on the potential improvement of efficiency in the surface systems.
Or, at least we need conservative assumptions on the potential increases based on
the information currently available.

7.4.6

Rain-fed Agriculture

Did the Commission’s report overlook the potential of rain-fed agriculture?
Surprisingly, the Commission projected only a modest growth in rain fed yields
from 1.0 tonnes/ha in 1993 to 1.5 tonnes/ha by 2050. At present, rain-fed area
accounts for 56 % of the grain crop but contributes only 39 % of the total production. But, by doubling the rain-fed yield to about 2.0 tonnes/ha over the next 50
years; the grain production on the existing rain-fed lands can alone be increased by

 
7

River Linking Project: A Solution or Problem to India’s Water Woes?

119

81 million metric tonnes. This kind of increase in grain production can meet a substantial part of the future food demand.
Sharma et al. (2010) find that frequent occurrence of mid-season and terminal
droughts were the main causes for low yield or crop failure in rain-fed cropped
lands. Small supplemental irrigation, especially during the water-stress period of the
reproductive stage of crop growth, can benefit a substantial part of the rain-fed area.
This requires collecting only 18–20 km3/year of water through rainwater harvesting
using small-scale structures, and will have little or no effect on downstream users.

7.4.7

Eco-system Water Needs

The Commission’s water allocation to eco-system services is only 10 km3–less than
1 % of the mean annual runoff of all river basins. Even the Commission has admitted that this is not an adequate provision. IWMI research shows that in many basins,
maintaining a healthy river ecosystem requires much more minimum environmental
flows (EF) (Smakhtin and Anputhas 2006).
Level of minimum EF needed depends on the natural hydrological variability of
the river and the maintenance requirements under various environmental management classes (Smakhtin et al. 2007). The former is an endogenous driver of the water
system and the latter is exogenous. Environmental management classes, which
depend on qualitative importance assigned by people, could range from pristine (natural) condition to slightly to moderately to critically modified conditions, and the
minimum EF could accordingly vary from 70 % to 15 % of the mean annual runoff.
At present, many of the water surplus river basins considered in the NRLP fall in
moderately modified category (Amarasinghe et al. 2008). If eco-systems’ water
needs get high priority, then effective water supply that is available for potentially
utilizable supply for other uses would diminish. In fact, many argue that environmental water demand should also include the needs of wetlands, for cleaning the
polluted rivers, for fisheries’ needs in the down streams etc. All these, and the resulting ecosystem water needs will have a significant impact on inter-basin water transfers, as the ultimate decision of the surplus or the level of closure of river basins is
decided on what proportion of the utilizable water resources are required for the
eco-system water needs.

7.5
7.5.1

Implications of NRLP Water Transfers
Hydrological Feasibility

Surplus water in river basins and hydrological feasibility of large water transfers is
a topic that is much in discussion; it is a highly contentious topic, too. Many contest
the very notion that there can be water surpluses in river basins. One such extreme
view, held by Bandyopadhyaya and Praveen (2003), is that “…from a holistic

 
120

T. Shah and U.A. Amarasinghe

perspective, one does not see any ‘surplus’ water, because every drop performs
some ecological service all the time. ….there is no ‘free surplus’ water in a basin
that can be taken away without a price.” Shiva (2003), likewise, considers NRLP to
be an act of violence against nature. Iyer (2003) is acerbic in his comments on
NRLP projects: “Are rivers bundles of pipelines to be cut, turned around, welded
and re-joined? This is technological hubris—arrogance—of the worst description,
prometheanism of the crassest kind. The country needs to be saved from this
madness.”
But others argue differently. For them, some large Indian River basins have vast
non-utilizable water resources, even after meeting all human and eco-system service’s needs. The total renewable water resource of the Brahmaputra basin is about
584 km3, which is about a quarter of India’s total water resources. But, only about a
quarter of that is potentially utilizable within the basin. Mohile and Anand (2009)
showed significant non-utilizable water resources also available in Mahanadi and
Godavari basins. Rapidly expanding population and increasing demand in other
basins can beneficially use a part of these non-utilizable water resources, without
noticeable impact on the eco-systems.
Although major donor basins have significant surpluses, Smakhtin et al. (2007)
showed that the use of annual data in feasibility reports shows up more water perceived to be available than actual for transfers at some transfer sites. This study
concluded that when intra-annual variability of flow is accounted, any transfers of
water at the transfer sites within the Krishna river basin would affect the environmental water requirement in the Krishna delta or vice versa. Hydrological modeling
of the Godavari (Polawaram)-Krishna (Vijayawada) link (Fig. 7.1) also confirms the
above finding that water transfers would affect the downstream users of the Godavari
basin (Bharati et al. 2008).
Most recently, the Comprehensive Assessment of Food and Agriculture (CA
2007) by IWMI and partners determined that investments in large-scale infrastructure is necessary in regions where there has historically been under-investment,
such as sub-Saharan Africa and parts of Asia. That Assessment however also said
that investment in large-scale irrigation, even as a component of multi-purpose projects, is generally economically unattractive. But, Kumar and Saha (2008), based on
data of India’s large and medium dams, shows that increasing the storage capacity
through large/medium dams is important for rapid economic growth in India.
These concerns and others hint at the need to be more circumspect about largescale water transfers worldwide. However, more recently the pendulum has begun
to swing back towards investments in water infrastructure. In some countries, most
notably in China, which did not have to depend on external sources to secure the
necessary financing, there have been many dams constructed in the recent past.
According to the ICOLD World Register, China has 4,434 large dams (ICOLD
2000), but the actual number can be as high as 22,000 according to other sources
(WCD 2000). The WSSD in Johannesburg recognized hydropower as a renewable
resource for power generation. And, the new World Bank water strategy (World
Bank 2004) laid the groundwork for a re-engagement of the multi-lateral banks in
large-scale water infrastructure. All in all, the pendulum of global opinion has gradually moved again in favor of large dams, notwithstanding all the concerns that have

 
7

River Linking Project: A Solution or Problem to India’s Water Woes?

121

arisen during recent decades. This change in the worldview may influence Indian
thinking about NRLP. Despite renewed attention to ‘giganticism’ in water infrastructure planning, the modalities to ensure that the infrastructure developed is
effective and sustainable will still remain highly contentious

7.5.2

Environmental Impacts

Environmentalists are worried about the ecological impacts of the NRLP water
transfers of such a massive scale. In May 2003, the Government of India’s own
Ministry of Environment and Forests raised 23 environmental concerns about the
NRLP. Independent researchers too worry on many counts, including seismic hazard, especially in the Himalayan component (Bandyopadhyaya and Praveen 2003).
Many worry also about the transfer of river pollution that accompanies inter-basin
water transfers. The potential loss of forests and biodiversity, of course, are recurring themes.
When completed, some 3,000 plus storages reservoirs of NRLP, will substantially change the river flow patterns and impact sediment loads to down-stream deltas. Such reduction in sediments could shrink river delta, affecting production and
mangrove ecosystems. Large numbers of reservoirs already constructed in the
Krishna basin have contributed to the shrinking of the river delta (Gamage and
Smakhtin 2008). Further construction under NRLP, on the one hand could only
exacerbate the shrinking of delta, and on the other hand may reduce the environmental flows, which-if protected—could partially arrest the shrinking delta.
The NRLP water transfers could also have both positive and negative externalities in terms of groundwater recharge and water logging. The proposed irrigation
transfers in the Godavari (Polawaram)-Krishna(Vijayawada) link could raise the
groundwater water level by 2 m and improve the groundwater profile of the overexploited blocks of the Krishna basin. Simultaneously, intensive surface irrigation
could increase the risk of water logging in about 16 % of the command area (Sharma
et al. 2008). Without precautionary planning, as in many other large irrigation
schemes in the past (Sharma et al. 2010), disbenefits of water logging could easily
offset the benefits of groundwater recharge.

7.5.3

Irrigation Benefits

The NRLP envisages many benefits: generation of hydropower, supply of much
needed drinking water to several million people, and industrial water supplies to
drought-prone and water-scarce cities in the west and south, mitigation of floods in
the east and droughts in the west and the south, and facilitation of inland navigation.
However, increased irrigation is by far the largest benefit envisaged from the project. It adds 25 million ha through surface irrigation and 10 million ha through
groundwater irrigation to water-scarce western and peninsular regions. This in turn

 
122

T. Shah and U.A. Amarasinghe

shall generate more employment and boost crop output and farm incomes. It shall
also provide multiplier benefits through backward linkages such as farm equipment
and input supplies and forward linkages such as agro-processing industries.
Among the many scathing criticisms that this key plank of the project has come
under, the most eloquent has been from Rath (2003). Based on simple, back of the
envelope calculations, Rath shows that assuming a 7 % interest rate per year, the
annual capital costs and interest to recover the total capital over a period 50 years
will be US$ 110/ha (Rs. 2,015/acre @ 1 US$ = 45 In Rs) in the peninsular component and US$ 334/ha in the Himalayan component. For irrigating hybrid jawar
(sorghum) in peninsular India, the required annual capital recovery cost alone will
be US$ 221/ha. Similarly, the annual capital recovery cost at 7 % interest over 50
years amounts to US$ 0.30 per watt of hydropower. At the same interest rate charged
during the construction period, the three components will cost US$ 252 billion (In
Rs. 1,147,873 crore), approximately double of what is now suggested. On the further assumption of a 5 % annual rate of inflation, the project will commit India to a
project outlay of US$ 22 billion (In Rs. 100,000 crore) per year.
There are other concerns about such large scale investment, given the past trends
of irrigation investments and benefits. The most notable trends are:
• India has invested more than US$ 24 billion (In Rs. 100,000 crore) since 1990 in
major and medium irrigation, yet it has hardly increase the net surface irrigated
area (Fig. 7.2). Tank irrigated area has been decreasing relentlessly
• Among southern states Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh, two of the major water
recipients of NRLP, have spent more than US$ 5 billion (In Rs. 22,500 crore) in
major and medium irrigation since 1970, but lost more than 500,000 ha of net
canal irrigated area over the same period (Amarasinghe et al. 2009);
• On the western front, Gujarat has already spent more than US$ 6 billion in the
Sardar-Sarovar Project, although the planned cost of construction was only US$
1.5 billion (In Rs. 6,840 crore). In spite of the cost over-run, only 0.1 of the 1.8
million ha of proposed area is irrigated (Talati and Shah 2009).
Ex-ante benefit: cost analyses of two link canals—Godawari (Polavaram)Krishna (Vijayawada) and Ken-Bethwa—show similar trends. Major parts of the
command areas in both links are already irrigated by groundwater or pre-existing
schemes. In the Godavari-Krishna link, groundwater already irrigates 90 % of the
en-route canal command. In the Ken-Bethwa link, rainfall is sufficient for the Kharif
season crop cultivation, for which a substantial part of the water transfers under the
link is planned. These studies show that when the canal links are considered individually, direct and indirect benefits per every cubic meter of water consumed or
delivered are rather low even under most optimistic scenarios of cropping patterns
(Bhaduri et al. 2009; Amarasinghe et al. 2008).
However, many of the NRLP links, such as those in the peninsular component,
are inter-dependent. Water transfers to a river basin from up-stream links are a substitute for water transfers out from the basin from downstream links. These form a
large project with many small components. Inocencio and McCornick (2008) have
shown that large projects with many smaller schemes, with diversified cropping pat-

 
7

River Linking Project: A Solution or Problem to India’s Water Woes?

123

terns, show better economic performance. Viewed from this perspective, similar are
water transfers and irrigation benefits from the major links from Mahanadi to
Godavari to Krishna to Pennar and Cauvery in the peninsular component
(Amarasinghe and Srinivasulu 2009). Although irrigation benefits of some of the
individual links are not financially attractive, the links taken together as a project
may prove financially attractive under a diversified cropping pattern.
Of course, the above benefits are only direct and indirect financial benefits from
irrigation. But, water infrastructure projects have other direct and indirect costs,
including the cost of displacement of people—resettlement and rehabilitation, and
the environmental impacts. The data on many of these aspects are scanty at best, and
it is difficult to assess financial implications to complete a social cost and benefit of
all links at present.

7.5.4

Social Costs

It is likely that NRLP shall displace adivasi’s and poor people on a massive scale.
Estimates are sketchy, but the construction of reservoirs and canals in the peninsular
component alone is expected to displace more than 583,000 people, and submerge
large areas of forest, agriculture and non-agricultural land. One estimate suggests
that the network of canals alone would displace about 5.5 million tribesmen and
farmers (Vombatkere 2003).
Many critics of large water projects often focus only on negative impacts, multipurpose water transfers potentially can and do bring significant social benefits.
Recent history of large-scale water resources projects in India and elsewhere, however, shows that despite government policies and procedures that include the necessary redress measures, displaced populations still suffer enormously. Such suffering
can be moderated or reduced but only though planned and sensitive resettlement
and rehabilitation programs which India has generally failed to establish so far.
Samad et al. (2009) shows that enhanced livelihood opportunities in relocation sites
can create longer-term benefits to compensate short-term losses.
In fact, many water transfer projects require both skilled and unskilled labor, and
the training provided for the local and sometimes for the regional or national workforce, is a major advantage for future endeavors. Often, large water development
projects increase access to new infrastructure: roads, which otherwise takes hours to
reach to a decent mode of transport; markets, which otherwise are not even reachable for several days; clean water supply- without which people, especially women
and children, trek hours to find a potable water source.
The large irrigation projects not only enhance the livelihood of the farming families in the command area, but also bring substantial multiplier effects to the region,
and in some cases at the national level too (WCD 2000). The Bhakra Irrigation
Project’s regional multiplier is 1.7 of the direct benefits (Bhatia et al. 2007). And the
Indus Basin, where irrigation is an integral part of the crop production system,
meets more than 80 % of the food production deficits of other basins in India. It is

 
124

T. Shah and U.A. Amarasinghe

not a secret that irrigation was a major factor in transforming the major food deficits
in India in the 1950s and 1960s to present day food surpluses.

7.5.5

Resources Mobilization

Many critics are skeptical of the government’s capacity to mobilize the kind of
investable funds that NRLP demands. Budgetary provisions made so far for water
development are far from enough to complete ongoing projects. During recent
years, under a special ‘Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Scheme’, the government has
been setting aside funds for the so-called ‘last mile’ projects(projects which are
nearly complete but have been languishing for years for the lack of relatively modest funds to complete minor residual work).
Many incomplete projects dot the country, to the extent that the NCIWRD estimated
at the turn of the century that India needed US$ 15.5 billion (Rs. 70,000 crores) during
the Tenth Plan and US$ 24.4 billion (Rs. 110,000 crores) during the Eleventh Plan just
to complete these ‘last mile’ projects. It is this fact that made senior researchers like
Iyer (2003) to quip, “We have had great difficulty in completing even single projects
successfully and we want to embark on 30 massive projects at the same time!”
These concerns relate to the small versus large storage debate. It is clear that
freshwater storage at present is inadequate to address tomorrow’s water needs. The
situation will be more acute with the pending climate change impacts. There is evidence that increasing storage only through a combination of large reservoirs, small
pond and tanks, soil moisture, groundwater aquifer and wet lands can bring the most
socio-economic benefits while reducing the environmental cost (Keller et al. 2000;
McCartney and Smakhtin 2010).

7.5.6

Trans-boundary Conflicts

There are trans-boundary issues of over-riding significance—within India and outside—when it comes to the actual implementation of NRLP. The Himalayan component is critically dependent on the agreement of neighboring countries Nepal and
Bhutan to the proposed construction, especially of dams, in their respective territories. Bangladesh, as a downstream riparian country, will be an affected party, and its
concerns need to be factored into the NRLP calculus. Under the India-Bangladesh
Treaty of December 1996 on the sharing of Ganga waters, India has undertaken to
protect the flows arriving at Farakka, which is the sharing point. West Bengal has
only reluctantly agreed to the large allocations of waters to Bangladesh under the
Ganga Treaty and has been pressing the needs of Calcutta Port. On the other hand,
Bangladesh may feel threatened that a diversion of waters from the Ganga to the
southern rivers will not be consistent with the sharing arrangement under the Treaty.
Mamata Banerjee, West Bengal’s Chief Minister recently refused to share Teesta

 
7

River Linking Project: A Solution or Problem to India’s Water Woes?

125

waters with Bangladesh in an open show of defiance to Government of India’s
attempt to forge cooperation with Bengladesh. Inability of India to secure compliance from its own state governments weakens the scope for trans-boundary international cooperation even on a win-win formula.
Water transfers between Brahmaputra and Ganga basins and from Ganga to other
rivers may require modification of existing agreements or new treaties. Bhaduri and
Barbier (2008) showed that India and Bangladesh could modify existing agreements to augment water supply, which in turn may benefit both countries. However,
this depends on the scale of political altruism India can muster to allocate water to
the downstream user or create some kind of insurance mechanisms to safeguard
rights of the downstream riparian. If India decides unilaterally to transfer water to
peninsular basins, or the States decide to use more than their share, Bangladesh
could incur huge environmental losses.
Existing international agreements elsewhere provide many lessons relevant to
the NRLP (Gichuki and McCornick 2008). Initial agreements of water transfers are
no longer functional in many inter-basin transfers, including those in the Aral Sea
basin among Central Asian Republics, in Tagus and Ebro basins in Spain. Many of
the conflicts arose later due to unforeseen circumstance at the planning stage. Often,
initial planning did not undertake a holistic analysis of t water supply and existing
uses, and future demand in different countries or basins.
Water transfers in the peninsular component too would hinge on inter-state politics, economics and agreements. Bihar may refuse to transfer Ganga water, as Lalu
Prasad Yadav, a senior political leader of the State, argued that if her farmers are
unable to use her water today, it does not mean they will remain unable to do so
forever. But, such rejections could change if the recipient states compensate Bihar
for the Ganga waters that it allowed to transfer.

7.6

Conclusion

Despite the Supreme Court order, if the fate of NRLP were to depend upon the
shape of the national debate around it, the dice are heavily loaded against it. This is
partly due to intensely polarized ongoing debate based on plurality of prevailing
conditions and experiences. The analyses of this paper have mixed conclusions. The
project is so large that it is difficult to conduct a holistic analysis leading to a social
cost and benefits. The main reason for this is due to little information and data the
available in the public domain. The NCAER (2008) study has evaluated the macroeconomic benefits of the NRLP project, but lacked the environmental and socioeconomic cost.
It is possible that the present proposal for NRLP has come a decade or two too
soon. Many drivers and assumptions, which were conducive to the condition in the
1990s, have changed since the proposal conception, and may change further before
the project undergoes feasibility analyses. Some of the changes are likely to create
conditions favorable for a comprehensive solution of the kind of NRLP, although it

 
126

T. Shah and U.A. Amarasinghe

is likely to be quite different in nature to the presently conceived form. In particular,
the following seven contingencies may be important in determining how the country
will plan its water infrastructure investments over the coming decade or two:
1. Just as a cash-strapped China cold-stored Mao’s proposal for transfers from
South to North until the mid-1990s, a US$ 2 trillion Indian economy around
2015 may take more enthusiastically to the idea of massive water infrastructure
investment that amounts to more than what was invested under the current US$
2 trillion Indian economy;
2. Economy-wide demand for the improved performance of public systems in
infrastructure creation and management—in road, railways, power, etc.,—will
also restore public confidence in the water bureaucracies’ capacity to deliver on
their promises, and ease the prevailing opposition to ‘sterile gigantisms’;
3. Similar economy-wide pressures to improve the rehabilitation of people affected
by projects on roads, Special Economic Zones and such other dynamic infrastructure areas will raise the bar for resettlement and rehabilitation work in water
infrastructure projects, alleviating the other major concerns of civil society about
large water projects;
4. Increasing disposable incomes will prompt the ‘median voter’ to demand better
water services and pay for them, transforming extant water scarcity into ‘economic’ water scarcity; this will improve the financial viability and sustainability
of water infrastructure; it will also mean water conflicts will be resolved through
price negotiations rather than through political bargaining or administrative
processes;
5. Similar pressures in agricultural water demand will arise due to intensive diversification of Indian agriculture that generates higher output-value per m3 of
water; diversification will create economic demand for more reliable, on-demand
irrigation service for which the farmers will be willing to pay substantially more
than what they pay for canal irrigation today;
6. Rising energy costs will make pump irrigation increasingly unattractive and
increase demand for surface water either for direct application to crops or for
groundwater recharge in western and peninsular India; rising costs of fossil fuel
will also make hydropower dams more attractive; and
7. Finally, rapid growth in urban agglomerations will seriously strain their
groundwater-dependent water supply systems and that in turn will make interbasin water transfers for urban water needs economically viable and politically
compelling.
India may or may not implement NRLP as proposed. However, there seems no
avoiding massive water infrastructure investments on a scale similar or even exceeding the NRLP. Medium- to long-term water sector planning needs to take account of
the aforementioned seven contingencies. Throughout Indian history, irrigation projects on a grand scale have been constructed more as political statements by ambitious rulers rather than as economic enterprises justified by cold calculus of benefits
and costs. If and when projects like NRLP is back on the drawing board and for
them to be a grand socio-economic statement, their techno-economics will need to
be based on the reality of India’s agricultural future rather than its past.

 
7

River Linking Project: A Solution or Problem to India’s Water Woes?

127

References
Alagh, Y. K., Pangare, G., & Gujja, B. (2006). Interlinking of rivers in India. Overview and KenBetwa link. New Delhi: Academic Foundation.
Amarasinghe, U. A., & Srinivasulu, R. (2009). Cost and benefits of the National River Linking
Project: An analysis of peninsular links. In International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Strategic Analyses of the National River Linking Project (NRLP) of India Series 5. Proceedings
of the Second National Workshop on Strategic Issues in Indian Irrigation, New Delhi, India,
8–9 Apr 2009. Colombo: International Water Management Institute (IWMI), pp. 29–51.
Amarasinghe, U. A., Sharma, B., Aloysius, N., Scott, C., Smakhtin, V., & de Fraiture, C. (2005).
Spatial variation in water supply and demand across river basins in India (Research report,
83). Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Amarasinghe, U. A., Shah, T., & Singh, O. P. (2007). Changing consumption patterns: implications on food and water demand in India (IWMI Research Report 119). Colombo: International
Water Management Institute.
Amarasinghe, U. A., Shah, T., & Anand, B. K. (2008). India’s water supply and demand from
2025-2050: Business-as-usual scenario and issues. In U. A. Amarasinghe & B. R. Sharma
(Eds.), Strategic analyses of the National River Linking Project (NRLP) of India, Series 2
(Proceedings of the workshop on analyses of hydrological, social and ecological issues of the
NRLP, New Delhi, India, 9-10 October 2007, pp. 23–61). Colombo: International Water
Management Institute (IWMI).
Amarasinghe, U. A, Palanisami, K., Singh, O. P,, & Sakthivadivel R. (2009). State of irrigation in
Tamil Nadu: Investments and returns. In International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Strategic Analyses of the National River Linking Project (NRLP) of India Series 5. Proceedings
of the Second National Workshop on Strategic Issues in Indian Irrigation, New Delhi, 8–9 Apr
2009. Colombo: International Water Management Institute (IWMI). pp 53–81.
Amarasinghe, U., Malik, R. P., Singh, S., & Bharat, R. (2010). Overcoming growing water scarcity: Exploring potential improvements in water productivity in India. Natural Resources
Forum, 34, 188–199.
Bagla P (2006) Controversial rivers project aims to turn India’s Fierce Monsoon into a friend. Main
Story: Going against the flow by Richard Stone and Hawk Jia. Science, 313, 1036–1037.
Bandyopadhyaya, J., & Praveen, S. (2003). The interlinking of Indian rivers: Some questions on
the scientific, economic and environmental dimensions of the proposal. Paper presented at
Seminar on Interlinking Indian Rivers: Bane or Boon? at IISWBM, Kolkata, 17 June 2003.
SOAS Water Issues Study Group, Occasional Paper No. 60.
Bhaduri, A., & Barbier, E. B. (2008). International water transfer and sharing: The case of the
Ganges River. Environment and Development Economics, 13(1), 29–51.
Bhaduri, A., Amarasinghe, U.A., & Shah, T. (2009). Groundwater expansion in Indian Agriculture:
Past trends and future opportunities. In U. A. Amarasinghe, T. Shah, & R. P. S. Malik (Eds.),
India’s water future: Scenarios and issues. Strategic Analysis of National River Linking Project
of India (Series 2). Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Bharati, L., Anand, B. K., & Smakhtin, V. (2008). Analysis of the inter-basin water transfer scheme
in India: A case study of Godavari-Krishna link. In Bharat R. Sharma, & Upali A. Amarasinghe
(Eds.), National river linking project – Analysis of hydrological, social and ecological issues.
Strategic Analysis of National River Linking Project of India (Series 2). Colombo: International
Water Management Institute.
Bhatia, R., Malik, R. P. S., & Bhatia, M. (2007). Direct and indirect economic impacts of the
Bhakra multipurpose dam, India. Irrigation and Drainage, 56, 195–206.
CA (Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture). (2007). Water for food,
water for life: A comprehensive assessment of water management in agriculture. London:
Earthscan, and Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Falkenmark, M., Lundqvist, J., & Widstrand, C. (1989). Macro-scale water scarcity requires
micro-scale approaches: Aspects of vulnerability in semi-arid development. Natural Resources
Forum, 13(4), 258–267.

 
128

T. Shah and U.A. Amarasinghe

Gamage, N., & Smakhtin, V. (2008). Do river deltas in east India retreat? A case of the Krishna
Delta. Geomorphology (GEOMOR-02734).
Gichuki, F., McCornick, P. G. (2008). International experiences of water transfers: relevance to
India. In Upali A. Amarasinghe, & Bharat R. Sharma (Eds.), Strategic Analyses of the National
River Linking Project (NRLP) of India, Series 2. Proceedings of the Workshop on Analyses of
Hydrological, Social and Ecological Issues of the NRLP, New Delhi, India, 9–10 Oct 2007.
Colombo: International Water Management Institute (IWMI), pp. 345–371.
GOI (Government of India). (1999). Report of the national planning commission: Integrated water
resources development. India: Government of India.
ICOLD (International Commission of Large Dams). (2000). World register of dams 1998:
Updating 2000 for China. Paris: International Commission on Large Dams.
Inocencio, A., & McCornick, P. G. (2008). Economic performance of public investments in irrigation
in India in the last three decades. In U. A. Amarasinghe, B. R. Sharma (Eds.), Strategic Analyses
of the National River Linking Project (NRLP) of India, Series 2. Proceedings of the Workshop on
Analyses of Hydrological, Social and Ecological Issues of the NRLP, New Delhi, India, 9–10 Oct
2007. Colombo: International Water Management Institute (IWMI), pp. 139–171.
Iyer, R. (2003). Water: Perspectives, issues concerns. New Delhi: Sage.
Iyer, R. (2012). With all due respect, My Lords. Http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/
Keller, A., Sakthivadivel, R., & Seckler, D. (2000). Water scarcity and the role of storage in development (IWMI research report, 39). Colombo: International WaterManagement Institute.
Kumar, M. D., Sharma, B. R., & Singh, O. P. (2009). Water saving and yield enhancing microirrigation technologies: How far can they contribute to water productivity in Indian agriculture?
In U. A. Amarasinghe, T. Shah, & R. P. S. Malik (Eds.), Strategic analyses of the National River
Linking Project (NRLP) of India, Series 1: India’s water future: Scenarios and issues
(pp. 267–292). Colombo: International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Mahmood, A., & Kundu, A. (2009). Demographic projections for India 2006-2051: Regional
variations. In U. A. Amarasinghe, T. Shah, & R. P. S. Malik (Eds.), Strategic analyses of the
National River Linking Project (NRLP) of India, Series 1: India’s water future: Scenarios and
issues (pp. 101–114). Colombo: International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Malik, R. P. S. (2009). Indian agriculture: Recent performance and prospects in the wake of globalization. In U. A. Amarasinghe, T. Shah, & R. P. S. Malik (Eds.), India’s water future:
Scenarios and issues. Strategic Analysis of National River Linking Project of India (Series 2).
Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
McCartney, M., & Smakhtin, V. (2010). Water storage in an era of climate change: Addressing the
challenge of increasing rainfall variability (Blue paper). Colombo: International Water
Management Institute (IWMI).
Mohile, A. D., & Anand, B. K. (2009). Natural flows assessment and creating alternative future
scenarios for major river Basins of Peninsular India. In U. A. Amarasinghe, T. Shah, & R. P.
S. Malik (Eds.), India’s water future: Scenarios and issues. Strategic Analysis of National
River Linking Project of India (Series 2). Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Nair, R., & Radhakrishna, M. D. (2005). Interlinking of rivers for mitigation of droughts. In
Volume I – Water for life with special reference to interlinking of rivers. Proceedings of the
Eleventh National Water Convention of India, 11 May 2005. New Delhi: National Water
Development Agency.
Narain, S. (2012). Grand distraction called river interlinking. New Delhi: Centre for Science and
Environment.
Narayanamoorthy, A. (2009). Drip and Sprinkler irrigation in India: Benefits, potential and future
directions. In U. A. Amarasinghe, T. Shah, & R. P. S. Malik (Eds.), India’s water future:
Scenarios and issues. Strategic Analysis of National River Linking Project of India (Series 2).
Colombo: International Water Management Institute

 
7

River Linking Project: A Solution or Problem to India’s Water Woes?

129

NCAER (National Council of Applied Economic Research). (2008). Economic impact of river
linking programme. Retrieved from http://nwda.gov.in/writereaddata/mainlinkfile/File277.pdf.
NWDA (National Water Development Agency). (2012a). National perspective plan. www.nwda.
gov.in
NWDA (2012b). Inter-basin water transfer: Benefits the need. www.nwda.gov.in
Rath, N. (2003). Linking of rivers: Some elementary arithmetic. Economic and Political Weekly,
38(29), 3032–303.
Samad, M., Shah, Z., Acharyulu, & S., Acharya, S. (2009). Managing rehabilitation and resettlement of the involuntarily displaced population: Lessons from selected hydro projects in India.
In International Water Management Institute (IWMI). Strategic Analyses of the National River
Linking Project (NRLP) of India Series 5. Proceedings of the Second National Workshop on
Strategic Issues in Indian Irrigation, New Delhi, India, 8–9 Apr 2009. Colombo: International
Water Management Institute (IWMI), pp. 123–137
Shah, Z., & Kumar, M. D. (2008). In the midst of the large dam controversy: Objectives, criteria
for assessing large water storages in the developing world. In B. R. Sharma, & U. A.
Amarasinghe (Eds.), National river linking project – Analysis of hydrological, social and ecological issues. Strategic Analysis of National River Linking Project of India (Series 2).
Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Shah, T., Aditi, D. R., Asad, S. Q., & Wang, J. (2003). Sustaining Asia’s groundwater boom: An
overview of issues and evidence. Natural Resources Forum, 27(2003), 130–140.
Sharma, A., & Bhaduri, A. (2009). The ‘Tipping Point’ in Indian agriculture: Understanding the
withdrawal of Indian rural Youth. In B. R. Sharma, & U. A. Amarasinghe (Eds.), India’s water
future: Scenarios and issues. Strategic Analysis of National River Linking Project of India
(Series 2). Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Sharma, B. R., Rao, K. V.G. K., & Massual, S. (2008). Groundwater externalities of surface irrigation transfers under river linking project: Polavaram-Vijayawada link. In B. R. Sharma, &
U. A. Amarasinghe (Eds.), National river linking project – Analysis of hydrological, social and
ecological issues. Strategic Analysis of National River Linking Project of India (Series 2).
Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Sharma, B. R., Rao, K. V., Vittal, K. P. R., Ramakrishna, Y. S., & Amarasinghe, U. (2010).
Estimating the potential of rainfed agriculture in India: Prospects for water productivity
improvements. Agricultural Water Management, 97(1), 23–30.
Shiva, V. (2003). River linking: False assumptions, flawed recipes. New Delhi: Navdanya. http://
www.navdanya.org/articles/false_assumptions.htm
Sinha, S. K., Sinha, A. K., & Chandra, S. (2005). Interlinking of rivers – Issues and challenges, In Volume
I – Water for life with special reference to interlinking of rivers. Proceedings of the Eleventh National
Water Convention of India, 11 May 2005. New Delhi: National Water Development Agency.
Smakhtin, V., & Anputhas, M. (2006). An assessment of environmental flow requirements of Indian
river basins. Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Smakhtin, V., Gamage, N., & Bharati, L. (2007). Hydrological and environmental issues of interbasin water transfers in India: A case of the Krishna River Basin (IWMI research report, 120).
Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Stone, R., & Jia, H. (2006). Hydroengineering: Going against the flow. Science, 313(5790), 1034–
1037. doi:10.1126/science.313.5790.1034.
Talati, J., Shah, T. (2009) Institutional Vacuum in Sardar-Sarovar Project: Framing ‘Rules-of-theGame’ In International Water Management Institute (IWMI). Strategic Analyses of the
National River Linking Project (NRLP) of India Series 5. Proceedings of the Second National
Workshop on Strategic Issues in Indian Irrigation, New Delhi, India, 8–9 Apr 2009. Colombo:
International Water Management Institute (IWMI). pp. 95–106. Centre. http://www.thehindu.
com/news/national/article2937800.ece
UN (The United Nations). (2004). Population revision 2004. New York: The United Nations.
Venkatesan, J. (2012). Set up special panel on linking of rivers forthwith, Supreme Court tells.

 
130

T. Shah and U.A. Amarasinghe

Verghese, B. G. (2003) Exaggerated fears on ‘Linking Rivers’. Himal South Asian, September
2003. http://www.himalmag.com/2003/september/response.htm
Vombatkere, S. G. (2003). Interlinking: Salvation or folly? http://www.indiatogether.org/2003/jan/
wtr-sgvintlink.htm
WCD (World Commission of Dams). (2000). Dams and development. A new framwork for
decision-making. London: Earthscan.
World Bank. (2004). Water resources sector strategy: Strategic directions for World Bank engagement. Washington, DC: World Bank.

 
Chapter 8

Water Pollution: Extent, Impact,
and Abatement
Prakash Nelliyat
Abstract Water pollution is an emerging challenge in developing countries like
India, which try to achieve rapid economic development without adequate/effective
environmental management facilities. In recent years, the pollution load discharged
by different sectors (domestic, industrial and agriculture) has increased, some times
beyond the carrying/assimilative capacity of the environment. Fresh water sources
(rivers, lakes and aquifers) are one of the major victims of pollution, whose impact
on health and livelihood of millions of poor people is critical, besides the physical
deterioration of the aquatic ecosystem. Hence, pollution hampers development in a
significant manner. Though various pollution management measures have been
attempted over a period of time, significant progress has not been achieved. In this
regard, a more realistic and integrated approach (with emphasis on appropriate
water pollution policies, strict enforcement, multi-stakeholders’ initiatives and
cooperation, affordable technology development and application of economic
instruments) needs to be implemented.
Keywords Water pollution • Integrated water resources management • Pollution
management • Water policy • Multi stakeholders analysis

8.1

Introduction

The availability of good quality and adequate quantity of water is a pre-requisite for
the survival of all living organisms, smooth functioning of ecosystems, enhancing
communities welfare and increasing their economic activities. However, freshwater
sources have been threatened, sometimes in an irreversible manner in recent times,
from various sources of pollution. The growing pollution of water sources is affecting the availability of safe water for various human uses. Besides, it causes environmental and health hazards, as well as a financial burden to community and
government.

P. Nelliyat (*)
Centre for Water Resources, Anna University, Chennai 600 025, India
e-mail: nelliyatp@yahoo.co.uk
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
V. Narain, A. Narayanamoorthy (eds.), Indian Water Policy
at the Crossroads: Resources, Technology and Reforms,
Global Issues in Water Policy 16, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-25184-4_8

131

 
132

P. Nelliyat

“Water Pollution is the degradation of water quality, as measured by biological,
chemical or physical criteria that can make it unsuitable for desired uses, such as
bathing, drinking or fishing, and can have serious effects on the health of humans
and animals through contact or injection” (Manson 2002). Pollution typically refers
to chemicals or other harmful substances in concentrations greater than would occur
under natural conditions, to make the water unfit for use. Major water pollutants
include microbes, nutrients, heavy metals, organic chemicals, oil and sediments.
Heat, which raises the temperature of the receiving water, can also be a pollutant.
Water pollution differs from nation to nation, with respect to the levels of economic
development and pollution governance. Rapid industrial development, uncontrolled
urbanization, intensive agriculture and aquaculture are the major causes of pollution
in developing countries like India.
Water pollution can broadly be categorized as: (a) Point source of pollution,
which occurs when harmful substances are emitted directly into the water and land,
and (b) Non-point source pollution, when pollutants are delivered indirectly through
transport or environmental change. Generally, the point source of pollution is easy
to monitor and regulate, compared to non-point sources.
Water pollution has severe impacts on the usefulness and value of water resources,
on ecosystems, fisheries, food production, health and social development, and economic activities. Water pollution can cause or aggravate tension and conflict, among
various water users and even between countries (Kraemer et al. 2001). The rising
water pollution leads to the real and potential loss of the overall development opportunity in an economy like India, when the poor are affected seriously. This chapter
examines the water pollution scenario, its impacts, management efforts and integrated pollution management strategies in the context of India.

8.2

Water Pollution Scenario in India

India possesses 17 % of the world’s population, but has only 4 % of the world’s
renewable water resources with 2.6 % of land area (MoWR 2012). In India, the
pressure of economic development is changing the distribution patterns of water
resources. The average availability of water is reducing steadily with the growing
population, and it is estimated that by 2020, India will become a water stressed
nation. There is no doubt that increasing fresh water contamination aggravates the
situation.
India has been experiencing rapid urbanization and this rate has increased from
10.84 % (1901) to 28.5 % (2001) and to 31.16 (2011). Most of our cities don’t have
proper schemes for the collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of liquid
and solid wastes. Besides, the expansion of peri-urban areas without adequate infrastructural services is an emerging challenge.
According to Lundqvist et al. (2003), the entire population growth in the world
during the coming decades will virtually occur in or be confined to urban agglomerations, and most of it in less developed countries like India. India is experiencing

 
8

Water Pollution: Extent, Impact, and Abatement

133

structural transformations, in terms of a decreasing role for agriculture, and the
increasing dominance of the industrial and service sectors, especially in urban areas.
The urban population is a heavy user of land and water resources. Hence, natural
resources like wetlands, agricultural land, tanks and lakes, and the associated flora
and fauna have been significantly lost. Moreover, waste (both solids and liquids)
generated in urban and peri-urban areas is more concentrated, and hence, more serious in terms of environmental damage (Nelliyat and Ambujam 2011). In India, the
urban population has increased from 11 % (1901) to 17 % (1951) and further to
28 % (2001). Similarly, the number of towns has also increased from 1916 to 2422,
to 4689, in these same respective years (Maiti and Agrawal 2005). Sanitation condition of the metro cities in India revealed that, almost universal flush toilet facility is
available in Mumbai followed by 90 % in Kolkata and 89 % in Delhi. However, the
matter of fact is that, more than half of this facility in Mumbai is available in a public place and not in house premises. Kolkata and Delhi might have a similar situation. Again it is unfortunate to note that about 9 % population of Kolkata and Delhi
uses pit toilet. Further, what is the worst situation is that 9 % of Chennai’s population does not have toilet facility at all followed by 6 % in Delhi (Maiti and Agrawal
2005).
The study done by Nelliyat et al. (2012) revealed the magnitude of urbanization
and its impacts on water sources in Chennai Metropolitan Area (CMA). CMA comprises a total area of 1189 km2. It consists of Chennai city (176 km2), 16 Suburban
Municipalities (240 km2), 20 Town Panchayats (156 km2), and 216 Village
Panchayats (617 km2). Chennai’s growth has been rapid since the 1970s. Its population has increased from 3.5 million (1971) to 5.8 million (1991) to 9.8 million
(2011) (CMDA 2007). Population projections based on the past trend showed that
CMA would hold population of 12.6 million by 2026, of which Chennai city would
accommodate only 5.8 million. Which means in future substantial urban growth
will occur in sub-urban part of the city. According to CMDA (2007), the sewerage
system in Chennai city has covered 98 % of its area. The Corporation is collecting
and disposing the solid wastes. However, the sewerage network and solid waste
management practices in the suburban areas are not satisfactory. The wastes are
disposed in the open lands and water bodies, which lead to high level contamination
of fresh water sources and its consequences on human well-being are serious.
About 29,000 million l/day (mld) of waste water is generated from India’s class-I
cities and class-II towns, out of which about 45 % (about 13,000 mld) is generated
from 35 metro-cities alone. A collection system exists for only about 30 % of the
waste water through sewer lines, and the treatment capacity exists for about
7000 mld (CPCB 2007). Thus, there is a large gap between the generation, collection and treatment of waste water. Most of the un-collected, un-treated waste water
finds its way to either nearby surface water bodies or cesspools.
According to CAG (2011), only about 10 % of the waste water generated from
the domestic and industrial sectors in India is treated; the rest is discharged as it is
into water bodies and land. In almost all urban centres, cesspools exist, which are
the breeding grounds for mosquitoes. Further, the wastewater accumulated in cesspools gets percolated in to aquifers and pollutes the groundwater. Even now, our

 
134

P. Nelliyat

cities have large numbers of conventional septic tanks and other low cost toilets,
which contaminate the groundwater.
The industrial sector discharges around 30,730 million cubic meters of effluents,
without proper treatment, into water bodies (CPCB 2006). For effluent treatment in
the small scale industrial sector under government initiatives, 88 Common Effluent
Treatment Plants (CETP) were constructed, having a total capacity of 560 mld.
These plants would cover more than 10,000 small scale industries. But the study
done by the CPCB (2006) revealed that the common effluent treatment plants are
not performing satisfactorily, largely due to improper operation and maintenance.
Run-off from agriculture fields is another major source of pollution as it contains
fertilizers and pesticides. Fertilizer application in the country has increased substantially: from 305 metric tonnes (1959–1960) to 20,340 metric tonnes (2005–2006)
(Khurana and Romit 2008). The use of pesticides has also increased from
20,305 tonnes (1974) to 85,030 tonnes (1994) (Khurana and Romit 2008). Water
quality is affected by frequent floods and droughts, and the over extraction of
groundwater, particularly in the coastal areas.
In certain parts of the country, groundwater quality degradation has occurred due
to natural reasons. The natural chemical composition of groundwater is influenced
predominantly by the type, depth of soils and subsurface geological formations
through which groundwater passes. According to CGWB (2010) the behaviour of
groundwater in the Indian sub-continent is highly complicated, due to the occurrence of diversified geological formations with considerable lithological and chronological variations, complex tectonic framework, climatological dissimilarities and
various hydro-chemical conditions. However, groundwater has become an important source of water for meeting the requirements of various sectors. It accounts for
nearly 80 % of the rural and 50 % of the urban domestic water needs. Besides, well
irrigation plays a significant role in increasing agricultural production. An aquifer is
generally less susceptible to anthropogenic induced contamination and pollution
when compared to surface water bodies. However, recently the trend has been
changing, and anthropogenic factors such as overexploitation of groundwater,
excessive use of fertilizers and pesticides in agriculture, and improper disposal of
urban/industrial waste, contaminate the groundwater. Nitrates, phosphates, and
heavy metals in the groundwater lead to various health disorders.
A recent study done by the CGWB (2010) through a network of about 15,500
groundwater samples indicated that well water in certain areas is found to have
concentrations beyond permissible limits of some constituents, and is not fit for
human consumption. The study results are summarised below.
Total Dissolved Solids – TDS – (Salinity) is the saltiness or dissolved salt content
that exists in groundwater. It is mostly influenced by aquifer material, solubility of
minerals, duration of contact and factors such as the permeability of the soil, drainage facilities, quantity of rainfall and above all, the climate of the area. The salinity
of the groundwater in coastal areas may be due to air borne salts, originating from
the air water interface over the sea, and also due to over pumping of fresh water

 
8

Water Pollution: Extent, Impact, and Abatement

135

which overlays saline water in coastal aquifer systems. The Bureau of Indian
Standards (BIS) has recommended a drinking water standard of a limit of 500 mg/l
for TDS, which can be extended to 2000 mg/l in the case of no alternative source.
But water having TDS of more than 2000 mg/l is not suitable for drinking. This is
observed in some districts of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal.
Chloride is highly soluble in water and moves freely through soil and rock. In
groundwater, the chloride content is mostly below 250 mg/l, except in cases where
inland salinity is prevalent and in coastal areas. The BIS has recommended a desirable limit of 250 mg/l of chloride in drinking water. This concentration limit can be
extended to 1000 mg/l in case no alternative source of water is available. However,
groundwater having concentrations of more than 1000 mg/l of chloride is not suitable for drinking purposes. This is observed in some districts in Andhra Pradesh,
Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal.
Fluoride Most of the fluoride found in groundwater is naturally drawn from the
breakdown of rocks and soils or weathering and deposition of atmospheric particles.
The occurrence of fluoride in natural water is affected by the type of rocks, climatic
conditions, nature of hydrogeological strata and time of contact between the rock
and the circulating groundwater. The presence of other ions, particularly bicarbonate and calcium ions, also affects the concentration of fluoride in the groundwater.
Small amounts of fluoride (less than 1.0 mg/l) have proven to be beneficial in reducing tooth decay. However, high concentrations (1.5 mg/l and above) have resulted in
staining of teeth. The BIS has recommended an upper desirable limit of 1.0 mg/l of
fluoride in drinking water, which can be extended to 1.5 mg/l if no alternative source
of water is available. But fluoride concentrations of more than 1.5 mg/l in water
make it un-suitable for drinking purposes. This is observed in some districts of
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Chattisgarh,
Haryana, Orissa, Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Bihar, Delhi,
Jharkhand, Maharashtra, and Assam.
Iron is a common constituent in soil and groundwater. It is present in water either
as soluble ferrous iron or insoluble ferric iron. The concentration of iron in natural
water is controlled by both physio-chemical and microbiological factors. It seeps
into groundwater mainly from the weathering of ferruginous minerals of igneous
rocks, such as hematite, magnetite and sulphide ores of sedimentary and metamorphic rocks. The permissible iron concentration in groundwater is less than 1.0 mg/l
as per the BIS for drinking water. Excessive iron has been found in some districts of
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Orissa,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Andaman
& Nicobar Island.

 
136

P. Nelliyat

Arsenic Arsenic is a trace element found in rocks, soils, and the water in contact
with them. Arsenic has been recognized as a toxic element and is considered a
human health hazard. The occurrence of arsenic is mainly in the aquifers up to
100 m depth, but deeper aquifers are free from contamination. As per the BIS for
drinking water, the maximum permissible limit of arsenic concentration in groundwater is 0.01 mg/l. Arsenic contamination has been found in the states of West
Bengal, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Assam and Chhattisgarh.
Nitrate is a naturally occurring compound that is formed in the soil when nitrogen
and oxygen combine. The primary source of all nitrates is atmospheric nitrogen gas.
This is converted into organic nitrogen by some plants by a process called nitrogen
fixation. Dissolved Nitrogen (Nitrate) is the most common contaminant of groundwater, and generally originates from non-point sources, such as leaching of chemical fertilizers & animal manure, groundwater pollution from septic and sewage
discharges, etc. It is difficult to identify the natural and manmade sources of nitrogen contamination. Some chemical and micro-biological processes such as nitrification and de-nitrification also influence the nitrate concentration. As per the BIS for
drinking water the maximum desirable limit of nitrate concentration is 45 mg/l.
Though nitrate is considered relatively non-toxic, a high concentration in drinking
water is of great concern because of increased risks of matheomoglobinemia
(Methemoglobin is a form of hemoglobin that contains ferric iron and has a
decreased ability to bind oxygen), particularly to infants. Excess concentration of
Nitrate in groundwater has been observed in most of the states.

8.3

Impacts of Pollution

Pollution is an ‘externality’ issue and its impacts on human health and wellbeing are
critical. The state of human health is inextricably linked to a range of water related
conditions: safe drinking water, adequate sanitation, minimized burden of water
related diseases and healthy freshwater ecosystems (WHO 2003). Water conveys
micro-organisms, and chemical pollutants, and is a source of radiological risks.
Pollutants are directly transferred to the human body through drinking water, and
indirectly to the water applied to food crops and livestock, fish, etc., and through
aerosols generated by air conditioning systems. Aquatic ecosystems serve as breeding habitats for insect vectors of diseases, and for snails that serve as intermediate
hosts in the transmission cycle of certain parasitic diseases. When the pollution load
increases in fresh water sources, millions of people are at risk (Nelliyat 2011).
Further pollution will increase the financial burden of local bodies through incremental costs for pure water supply.
Historically, rural settlements managed their drinking water requirement through
local sources, and quality issues did not emerge except in a few habitats due to
geogenic reasons. However, the level of pollution has increased in recent times due
to various anthropogenic reasons. Our country is also characterised by non-unifor-

 
8

Water Pollution: Extent, Impact, and Abatement

137

mity in the level of awareness, socio-economic development, education, poverty,
practices and rituals which add to the complexity of providing water (Khurana and
Romit 2008). Even if the government has undertaken various drinking water programmes with huge expenditure over a period, many rural settlements still lack safe
and secure drinking water.
Bacterial contamination of water continues to be a widespread problem across
the country, and is a major cause of health problems. During 2005, the CPCB conducted a detailed water quality analysis, and the results indicated that organic pollution (BOD and coliform) continues to be predominant in aquatic resources. It was
observed that nearly 66 % of the samples had BOD values less than the acceptable
limits and 44 % of the samples indicated the presence of coliform. About 70–80 %
of water borne diseases in India are caused by the discharge of untreated/partially
treated sewage and industrial effluents into water bodies. The health costs of water
pollution are enormous. Annually 37.7 million Indians are affected by water diseases, including the loss of 75 million working days (Khurana and Romit 2008).
Around 1.5 million children die of diarrhoea alone (Khurana and Romit 2008).
In India, the cost of inaction or the estimated overall environmental damage cost
from pollution was $9.7 billion/year or 4.5 % of GDP in 1992. Out of the total damage cost, the health impact of water pollution was estimated to be US$5710 million
(59 %) (Brandon and Hommann 1995). Water related diseases impose burdens on
both the household’s and the nation’s economy. At the household level, the economic loss includes cost of treatment, and wage loss during sickness. Loss of working days affects national productivity. Besides, the government also spends huge
money on treatment of the sick and in providing other supporting services. According
to a Government of India estimate, the expenditure on health care adds up to Rs.
6700 crore (Rs. 60 per head) annually.
Pollution impacts on ecosystems (biodiversity) and various economic activities
like agriculture, livestock, fisheries etc., are also of concern. The study done by
Nelliyat (2012) revealed the various impacts of untreated/partially treated textile
effluent discharge in a South Indian river basin (Noyyal). Since the groundwater and
surface water sources are not suitable for cultivation, farmers incur heavy losses.
Most of the saline sensitive crops have disappeared from the basin and the productivity of the existing crops has reduced. Water contamination has also affected the
domestic water sector, and households are purchasing or fetching fresh water from
distant sources. Since all the surface water sources are highly polluted, biodiversity
and fisheries are affected, and fishermen have lost their livelihood options. Industries
are also bringing their required water from the non-polluted/distant areas through
tankers or pipelines. The annual damage cost of pollution was estimated as Rs.
448.9 million, of which Rs. 352.9 million is for agriculture, Rs. 130.5 million for
domestic water supply and Rs. 1.5 million for fisheries.
Pollution impacts are also significant on fisheries and other coastal resources
such as mangroves and corals. India has 7500 km of coast line. A number of urban
settlements, including mega cities and industries are located on the coast. In the
coming decades, this pressure will intensify further, as coastal urbanization and
inward population migration increase. The considerable amount of waste generated in

 
138

P. Nelliyat

coastal areas is directly discharged in to the sea, leading to a significant impact on the
marine environment. Municipal/domestic wastes reduce the dissolved oxygen (DO),
increase hydrogen sulphide, BOD and faecal coliform. Industrial waste affects the
DO, temperature, turbidity, pH and increases the BOD, COD, and suspended solids.
Coastal areas are experiencing overexploitation of groundwater. Seawater intrusion
induced contamination of the aquifer is a major challenge to freshwater security in
coastal areas of the country (Nelliyat et al. 2009). Further, the intensive aqua-cultural practice in coastal villages has led to salinization of the groundwater.
Coastal cities in India are under the looming threat of pollution. The type and
quantum of pollutants into the coastal ecosystem of India are given in Table 8.1.
In Mumbai, the river Kalu flowing through the industrial towns of Ambarnath,
Ulhasnagar and Kalyan has a mercury concentration exceeding 100 ppm. Thana
creek receives effluents of over 50 MLD where high mercury levels are present in
the water, sediments and living organisms. In Calcutta the Hoogly river carries
effluents that have contaminated fish and shell fish with heavy metals such as Ni,
Cu, Cd and Zn. The sediments near Haldia have up to 10 ug/g of pesticides. These
river waters are contaminated by e-coli, shigella, salmonella and other human
pathogens – indication of severe sewage contamination. In Kochi, the Periyar
river receives effluents from chemical industries and untreated sewage. Incidents
of ulsuration in shrimp and fish, and frequent fish mortality have affected traditional fishing. In Goa, estuarine and coastal waters are “clean”, though there is
high sediment load from mining activities. The Mandovi-Zuari estuaries receive
over 30 MLD of partly treated domestic sewage and 15 MLD of industrial effluents (Elrich 2013).
The study by Palanisamy et al. (2006) indicated that the levels of hydrological
pollution of Chennai coastal zone have been increased in the recent years by an
uncontrolled disposal of wastewater and pollutants due to human activities. Analysis
of physical, chemical and biological parameter determinations indicated that the
concentrations of dissolved oxygen (DO), biochemical oxygen demand (BOD),

Table 8.1 Pollution load in the coastal ecosystems in India
Sr. No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Source: Elrich (2013)

Input/pollutant
Sediments
Industrial effluents
Sewage – largely untreated
Garbage and other solids
Fertilizer – residue
Synthetic detergents – residue
Pesticides residue
Petroleum hydrocarbons
(Tar balls residue)
Mining rejects, dredged spoils &
sand extractions

Quantum – annual
1600 million tonnes
50 × 106 m3
0.41 × 109 m3
34 × 106 tonnes
5 × 106
1,30,000 tonnes
65,000 tonnes
3500 tonnes
0.2 × 106 tonnes

 
8

Water Pollution: Extent, Impact, and Abatement

139

chemical oxygen demand (COD), nutrients (nitrate, nitrite and phosphate), turbidity, maximum probable number (MPN) and chlorophyll a (Chl a) reached notably
high levels at all sample locations before monsoon. The concentrations of trace/
toxic metals such as manganese, copper, nickel, lead, cadmium and cobalt also
reached very high levels, leading to further habitat and ecological destruction.
Even if pollution damage is widespread in certain locations, its impacts are more
on the socially vulnerable and poor communities due to their weak coping options.
Moreover, they are less aware of the various pollution consequences. For example,
when traditional drinking water sources get contaminated, the rich can buy packaged water. But the poor are not able to pay, and hence are compelled to use the
polluted water.

8.4

Pollution Management

Historically, the municipalities and such civic authorities have been responsible for
management of the wastes in cities. However, in recent periods due to various reasons (including erosion of authority, inability to raise revenues and inadequate managerial capabilities) urban bodies have not been able to cope with this massive task.
That is why, it became necessary to launch special programmes like the Ganga
Action Plan and subsequently the National River Conservation Plan, which are
essentially addressed to the task of trapping, diverting and treating municipal wastewater (CPCB 2007).
India has a long tradition of institutions in water resources management, which
is seen from its ancient culture to the modern legislative devices. Ancient Indian
religious literature (Vedas, Upanishads, Smiritis and Dharmas) preached a worshipful attitude towards earth and its elements including water and enshrined a respect
for nature and environmental harmony and conservation (Sankar 1998). During the
British period, too environmental (water pollution) issues garnered attention
through:
(a) The Indian Penal Code 1860, that contains one chapter (Chapter XIV) on
offences affecting public health, safety, convenience, decency and morals.
(b) The Indian Easement Act of 1882, that guaranteed property rights of riparian
owners against “unreasonable” pollution by upstream users.
(c) The Shore Nuisance (Bombay-Kalova) Act, 1893, that was enacted to check
wastes and marine water pollution.
(d) The Municipal and Public Health Acts on the pattern of Local Authorities Act
of United Kingdom, conferred powers on the local bodies for controlling water
pollution caused by industrial effluents and for necessary action against the erring industries. Further it prohibits the discharge of any pollutant or trade effluent from factories into municipal drains, and the discharge of sewage into any
watercourse until it had been treated, so as not to contaminate the water (Sankar
1998).

 
140

P. Nelliyat

In the Indian Constitution, environmental protection has been emphasized. The
River Boards Act, 1956 is an important legislation enacted by the Parliament.
Further the 42nd Constitution Amendment Act, 1976, inserted specific provisions
for environmental protection in the form of Directive Principles of State Policy and
Fundamental Duties. Article 51A (g) was envisaged to protect and improve the
natural environment, including forests, lakes, rivers, wildlife, and to have compassion for living creatures. For water pollution management, various initiatives have
been taken by the government (Table 8.2).

8.4.1

Legislative Framework

The goal of compliance with environmental laws is to assure the average citizen,
that natural resources are protected, that specific violators can be identified, and that
they comply with legal provisions. This is needed in order to safeguard human
health and the environment and to deter future violations (CAG 2011). The main
legal provisions with regard to the prevention of water pollution in India are as
follows:
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act: 1974 was the first environmental law enacted by Parliament. It defines pollution as ‘such contamination of
water or such alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of water
on such discharge of any sewage or trade effluent or of any other liquid, gaseous or
solid substance into water (whether directly or indirectly) as may, or is likely to

Table 8.2 Water pollution management efforts
Legislation
♦Water (Prevention
and Control of
Pollution) Act,1974
♦Water (Prevention
and Control of
Pollution) Rules, 1975
♦The water
(Prevention and
Control of Pollution)
Cess Act, 1977
♦Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986
♦Environment
(Protection) Rules
1986

Policy
♦National Water
Policy, 2002
♦National
Environment
Policy, 2006
♦Draft National
Water Policy, 2012

Programmes
♦Ganga Action Plan
♦National River
Conservation Plan
♦National Lake
Conservation Plan
♦Jawaharlal Nehru
National Urban
Renewal Mission
♦Urban Infrastructure
♦Development
Scheme for Small and
Medium Towns

Industrial water
pollution (SSIs)
♦Closure Policy
♦Waste Minimization
♦Common Effluent
Treatment Plants
(CETPs)
♦Relocation strategy

 
8

Water Pollution: Extent, Impact, and Abatement

141

create a nuisance or render such water harmful or injurious to public health or
safety, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural or other legitimate uses,
or to the life and health of animals or of aquatic organisms’. The Act provides for
the prevention and control of water pollution and for maintaining or restoring the
wholesomeness of water in the country. To achieve this objective, the Act provided
for establishing the Pollution Control Board (PCB) at the central and state levels. It
lays down a system of consent, whereby no industry or operator process or any
treatment and disposal system can be established without the prior consent of the
state Board. Similarly, no industry/process can discharge sewage or trade effluents
into a stream or well/sewer/land in excess of the standards. Contravention of the
provisions of this Act is punishable in monetary as well as non-monetary terms.
The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 provides for
the levy of cess on the use of water by various users, i.e., industry and local authorities which are entrusted with the duty of supplying water under the law. This cess
was meant to augment the funds required by the state PCB for their effective functioning, in the discharge of duties under the Act. The cess is collected by the state
government concerned, and paid to the central government. The proceeds are
credited to the consolidated fund of India. The central government, after due appropriation made by Parliament by Law, disburses such sums of money as it may think
fit to the central and state Boards, having regard to the amount of cess collected by
the state government concerned.
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 was enacted in the aftermath of the Bhopal
gas tragedy in 1984; it also refers to the decisions taken at the Stockholm Conference
in 1972, and expresses concern about the decline in environmental quality, increasing pollution, loss of vegetal cover and biological diversity, excessive concentrations of harmful chemicals in the ambient atmosphere, growing risks of environmental
accidents, and threats to life systems. The Act is a comprehensive piece of legislation and under this, the Environment Protection Rules (EPR) was announced. The
nodal agency for implementing various legislations relating to environmental protection at the centre is the MoEF. It is expected to provide directions to the CPCB
on matters relating to the prevention and control of pollution, and design and implement a wide range of programmes relating to environmental protection.
Subsequently, different standards were set for emission and effluent discharge.
Under EPR 1986, the Government of India notified in 1993, that the emission or
discharge of environmental pollutants from industries, operations or processes shall
not exceed the relevant parameters and standards specified. The general standards
for the discharge of effluents cover more than 40 parameters, including colour and
odour, suspended solids, dissolved solids, pH, BOD, COD, chemicals and metals.
The permissible limits vary depending on where the effluents are discharged, viz.,
inland water surface, public sewers, land for irrigation, and marine coastal areas.
These standards are based on concentrations of pollutants per unit of effluent.

 
142

8.4.2

P. Nelliyat

Policy Framework

Besides the legal framework described above, the following policy provisions
address the issues of water pollution in India:
The National Water Policy (NWP) adopted in 1987, was reviewed and updated
by the MoWR in 2002. This policy aimed at meeting the challenges that have
emerged in the development and management of water resources, including water
pollution. The policy emphasizes that:
(a) Both surface water and groundwater quality should be regularly monitored
(b) Effluents should be treated as per standards before being discharged.
(c) Principle of ‘polluter pays’ should be followed.
(d) Necessary legislation should be made for preservation of water bodies from
encroachment and deterioration.
(e) New techniques should be followed to eliminate pollution and
(f) Waste water should be recycled and reused.
The MoWR 2002 envisaged that in a time bound manner, (a period of 2 years)
the states would frame and adopt the respective state water policies (MoWR 2002).
National Environment Policy, 2006 enacted by the MoEF, deals with water quality pointing out that improvement in the existing strategies and innovations are
needed to eliminate the pollution of surface and groundwater resources. It also
states that resources should be conserved, and water availability augmented by maximising retention, eliminating pollution and minimising losses. The policy emphasized the need:
(a) To develop and implement, public-private partnership models for setting up and
operating treatment plants.
(b) To prepare and implement action plans for major cities for water pollution,
through regulatory as well as incentive based instruments.
(c) To take measures to prevent pollution of water bodies from sources, especially
waste disposal on lands.
(d) To enhance spatial planning with adequate participation by local communities,
to ensure clustering of polluting industries, and to facilitate setting up of CETPs.
(e) To promote R&D in development of low cost treatment technologies at different scales.
(f) To manage pollution through pricing policies of agricultural inputs, especially
pesticides and dissemination of agronomy practices.
Draft National Water Policy, 2012 indicated that “access to safe and clean drinking water and sanitation should be regarded as a right to life essential to the full
enjoyment of life and all other human rights” (MoWR 2012 page no 5). The policy
emphasised the following:
(a) Recycle and reuse of waste water and de-salinization.
(b) Urban water supply and sewage treatment schemes should be integrated and
executed through proper pricing policy.

 
8

Water Pollution: Extent, Impact, and Abatement

143

(c) Industries in water short regions should be allowed to either withdraw only the
make up water or should have an obligation to return treated effluent to a specified standard back to the hydrologic system.
(d) Subsidies and incentives should be implemented to encourage recovery of
industrial pollutants and recycling/reuse, which are otherwise capital
intensive.
(e) Industrial effluents, local cess pools, residues of fertilizers and chemicals, etc.,
should not reach the groundwater as cleaning is complex.

8.4.3

Programmes

Ganga Action Plan (GAP) is a pioneer comprehensive attempt to address pollution at the river basin level. The Ganga originates from the Gangotri Glacier in the
Garhwal Himalayas, and traversing a distance of 2525 km, flows into the Bay of
Bengal at Ganga Sagar in West Bengal. The Ganga basin (861,404 km2) is the largest river basin in India, and covers approximately 25 % of the country’s total geographical area, and caters to about 40 % of the population. The utilizable water is
around 30 % of India’s total usable water from major river basins (ERI 2011).
During the course of its journey, municipal sewage from 29 Class-I cities (population >1,00,000), 23 Class II cities (population between 50,000 and 1,00,000) and
about 48 towns, effluents from a number of industries, and pollutants from nonpoint sources, are discharged into the river (MoEF 2004). The average population
density of the Ganga basin is 520 persons/km2, while the national average is 325.
Major cities, including Delhi, Kolkata, Kanpur, Lucknow, Patna, Agra, Meerut,
Varanasi, and Allahabad, are situated in the basin. These cities have large and growing populations, and a rapidly expanding industrial base (Vinod 2011). The total
wastewater generation in the Ganga basin is about 6440 MLD.
For immediate reduction of the pollution load on the river Ganga a GAP was
prepared by Department of Environment (now MoEF) in 1984, based on the investigation carried out by the CPCB. For implementation of the GAP, the Government
of India constituted the Central Ganga Authority, under the chairmanship of the
Prime Minister in 1985.
At the time of launching, the main objective of the GAP was to improve the
water quality of the Ganga to acceptable standards by preventing the pollution load
reaching the river. The objective of the GAP was, however, recast in 1987, restricting it to include only the restoration of the river water quality to the “Bathing class”
standard (Dissolved Oxygen – Not less than 5 mg/l, Bio-chemical Oxygen Demand –
Not more than 3 mg/l, Bacterial Load/Coliform Count – Not more than 10,000 per
ml, Faecal Coliform – Not more than 2500 per 100 ml and pH – 6.5 to 8.5) (MoEF
2004). The GAP emphasized the ‘interception and diversion of wastewater and its
treatment in Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs), before discharging into river’. For
implementing the plan a comprehensive institutional arrangement was created at
different levels. The allotted money by the Government of India for the first stage of

 
144

P. Nelliyat

GAP (1985–1992) was Rs. 451.70 crore. Until recently, an amount of Rs. 1612.38
crores has been spent on the second stage (MoEF 2004; ERI 2011).
According to Vinod (2011) GAP is one of the longest and ambitious government
interventions, which has significantly influenced policies for controlling water pollution in India. However, GAP has been criticized on many fronts: inordinate delays
in implementation, irregular release of funds, confusions over roles of institutions,
weak monitoring, inadequacy of standards for assessing water-quality, irregular and
inadequate operation and maintenance of the assets, political motivations, ‘quality’
and ‘purity’ of the Ganga water, etc. (Ahmed 1990; Divan 1995; Alley 1994; Vinod
2011). The Central Government itself has accepted that despite having spent more
than 2500 crores of rupees on abatement of the pollution of the Ganga in the earlier
phases, it has not been quite effective (Vinod 2011).
National River Conservation Programme (NRCP) The GAP has generated considerable interest, and set the scene for evolving a national approach towards replicating this program – NRCP – for the other polluted rivers of the country. After the
completion of GAP-I, the programe of river clearing was extended to other major
rivers of the country under two separate schemes (GAP-Phase II and NRCP). The
Yamuna and Gomati Action Plans were approved in 1993 under GAP-II, while
other major rivers were subsequently approved in 1995 under the NRCP, covering
190 towns and 39 rivers in 20 states. So far Rs. 4302.43 crores (including state government share) has been spent under this programme. The pollution load to be tackled has been estimated as 4906.53 mld (MoEF 2012a).
National Lake Conservation Programme (NLCP) Lakes are valuable ecosystems and provide a range of goods and services to humankind. They act as livelihood sources (irrigation, fisheries, washing) for millions of poor people. They are
sources of fresh water and serve as habitat to many plants and animals. Lakes can
moderate hydrological events, such as drought and floods, influence the microclimate and enhance the aesthetic beauty of the landscape. However, in recent times,
rapid urbanization and degradation of catchments have resulted in the deterioration
of lakes (decline in water quality, loss of biodiversity, eutrophication, encroachment, siltation and shrinkage). Recognizing the importance of lakes, particularly
urban ones, the MoEF launched an NLCP in 2001, exclusively aimed at restoring
the lakes in different parts of the country. The objective of the scheme is to “restore
and conserve the urban and semi-urban lakes of the country, degraded due to waste
water discharge into the lake and other unique freshwater eco-systems, through an
integrated ecosystem approach”. The scheme operates on a funding pattern of 70:30
costs sharing option between the Central and the participating State Governments.
Fourty-four lakes were included in this programme and the total cost was Rs.
1028.19 crores.
Activities covered under the NLCP are: (a) the prevention of pollution from
point sources by intercepting, diverting and treating the pollution loads, (b) in situ
measures such as de-silting, de-weeding, bio-remediation, aeration, biomanipulation, nutrient reduction etc. with the help of successfully tested ecotechnologies depending upon the site conditions, (c) catchments area treatment

 
8

Water Pollution: Extent, Impact, and Abatement

145

include forestation, storm water drainage, silt traps etc., (d) strengthening of bund,
lake fencing, shoreline development etc., (e) lake front eco-development including
public interface, (f) solid waste management, prevention of pollution from nonpoint sources by providing low cost sanitation, and (g) public awareness and public
participation, capacity building, training and research in the area of Lake
Conservation, and any other activity depending upon specific location (MoEF
2012b).
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) The tremendous increase in urban population over the last two decades resulted in acute infrastructural deficiencies, including sanitation and solid waste management. With this
consideration the Government of India estimated that over a 7 year period, (starting
from 2005 to 2006) the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) required a total investment of
Rs. 120,536 crores (Rs. 17,219 crores annually) for infrastructure development.
Totally 63 cities are included in this programme (7 mega cities with a population of
more than 4 million, 28 medium cities with populations between 1 and 4 million and
28 small cities with less than 1 million population).
Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns
(UIDSSMT) was launched in 2005 for improving the infrastructure in towns and
helping create durable public assets and quality oriented services in cities & towns,
enhance public-private-partnership in infrastructural development and, promote the
planned integrated development of towns and cities. The targeted duration of the
scheme was 7 years from 2005 to 2006. The scheme would apply to all cities/towns
not included under JNNURM. The components of the scheme covered all urban
infrastructure developmental projects, including water supply, sewerage, solid
waste management and preservation of water bodies. The sharing of funds would be
in the ratio of 80:10 between the Central and State Governments, and the balance
10 % could be raised by the nodal/implementing agencies from financial
institutions.
In brief, the waste management attempts under JNNURM and UIDSSMT were
a positive step in maintaining water quality.

8.4.4

Industrial Pollution Management

The government has taken some special initiatives for industrial water pollution
management, particularly, the small scale industries (SSIs). The National
Productivity Council estimated that SSIs were responsible for 65 % of industrial
pollution and 40 % of waste generation (Yadav 2002). In India, the enforcement
agencies have adopted a policy of ‘closure’, but its negative impacts on production
and employment are critical. Then the MoEF in collaboration with the World
Bank launched a project for ‘waste minimization’ in the late 1990s. 45 waste
minimization circles were set up in various sectors in different parts of the country.
Unfortunately, the project has not been successful in achieving its objectives.

 
146

P. Nelliyat

Out of the 300 waste minimization options identified, only 120 were implemented
(Yadav 2002).
Subsequently, the Government focused on ‘Common Effluent Treatment Plants
(CETPs)’ where SSIs could come together, collect and treat their wastewater in a
common centre. Besides, the CETPs could minimize the treatment cost and also the
problem of technical know-how. During 1990–2000, more than 90 CETP projects
were approved in India, with financial assistance from different agencies, including
the World Bank. But now, the CETPs are facing a big problem with the operating/
running costs, and industrialists are unwilling to share the cost, which ultimately
has seriously affected the efficient functioning of the plants. The ‘relocation strategy’ is another strategy widely discussed and some felt that this is the only solution
to solve the SSIs’ pollution problem in urban areas. Based on the Supreme Court’s
order, the Delhi Government sealed around 16,000 non-conforming industrial units
and decided to relocate them. But experience shows that the relocation of units simply means relocation of pollution (Gupt 2003).

8.5

Water Pollution Control Efforts: Emerging Lessons

River cleaning and control of pollution programmes for our polluted rivers are being
implemented since 1985. The programmes seek to address pollution from point and
non-point sources, through the construction of STPs, low cost sanitation, electric
crematoria etc. However, the data on the results of these programmes are not very
encouraging. The Ganga in certain stretches, Yamuna, Gomti, Godavari, Musi,
Cauvery, Cooum, Mahananda, Khan, Kshipra, Vaigai, Chambal, Rani Chu,
Mandovi, Sabarmati, Subarnarekha, Tungabhadra, Pennar, Pamba, Betwa, Krishna,
Sutlej etc., continue to be plagued by high levels of organic pollution, low level of
oxygen availability for aquatic organisms and bacteria, protozoa and viruses, which
have faecal-origin and cause illnesses (CAG 2011).
Most lakes in India are under threat from nutrient overloading, which is causing
their eutrophication and eventual choking up by the weeds proliferating in the
nutrient-rich water. The implementation of NLCP in conserving these lakes has had
no discernible effect. Pichola, Pushkar, Dimsagar, Banjara, Kotekere, Bellandur, Veli
Akkulam, Shivpuri, Powai, Rankala, Twin lakes, Bindusagar, Mansagar, Mansiganga,
Rabindra Sarovar, Mirik, Kodaikanal lake, Dal lake, Durgabari lake, Laxminarayanbari
Lake, Dimsagar Lake etc., have shown poor water quality. However, there have been
some success stories like Nainital lake, Kotekere lake, Sharanabasaveshwara lake
and Mansagar, where the water quality has improved after completion of conservation programmes (CAG 2011). Even if various strategies have been introduced for
pollution management in the industrial sector, notable achievement has not been
attained. Still industries play a significant role in water pollution.
Even if India has a strong historical heritage in water resource management
bounded with culture and legislation, the country’s performance in pollution control
is not appreciable. Still many locations in the country are under pollution threat.

 
8

Water Pollution: Extent, Impact, and Abatement

147

Only Kerala formulated a separate policy to deal with water pollution. The Water
Policy of most of the states also does not give adequate emphasis on the prevention
and control of water pollution. The recent study by CAG (2011) concludes that
water pollution has not been adequately addressed in any policy in India, both at the
central and the State levels. Besides, in the absence of a specific ‘water pollution
policy’ which would also incorporate the prevention of pollution, the treatment of
polluted water and ecological restoration of polluted water bodies, the government’s
efforts in these areas would not get the required emphasis and thrust. Further, CAG
(2011) study observed a serious failure in planning, implementation and monitoring
various programs for the control of the pollution of rivers, lakes and groundwater,
which are summarized below.
For planning the MoEF and the states: (a) Did not undertake a complete inventory of rivers/lakes and species associated with them. (b) Did not carry out an identification of the existing pollution levels in terms of biological indicators. (c) Had
not identified and quantified contaminants, including human activities. (d) Did not
assess the risks of polluted water to health and environment. (e) Did not adopt the
basin level approach for the control of pollution. (f) Did not develop water quality
goals, and failed to enforce them (CAG 2011).
With regard to implementation: (a) Current programmes were insufficient. (b)
Institutional set-up to manage various programmes was inadequate. (c) Inclusion of
rivers and lakes in NRCP and NLCP respectively, was flawed. (d) 82 % of the projects undertaken under NRCP were completed after the scheduled date.
In monitoring: (a) Inspection and monitoring of projects being implemented
under NRCP and NLCP was inadequate at all three levels, i.e., local, state and central. (b) There was a paucity of a network for tracking the pollution of rivers, lakes
and groundwater as there were inadequate numbers of monitoring stations. (c) No
real-time monitoring of water quality was taking place and the data on water quality
had not been disseminated adequately.
Thus, one can conclude that the programmes to control the pollution of rivers,
lakes and groundwater in India have not had the desired results.

8.6

Conclusion

In developing countries, environmental management strategies are not satisfactory.
Many of the responsible bodies for water-related services, have centralized structures, which inadequately deal with issues of consultation and interaction with other
stakeholders, especially users have proven to have a weak effect regarding water
pollution control (European Commission 2000). Besides, water pollution has not
been a major topic of political debate yet, and therefore, political instruments have
been scarcely implemented. But responses such as Environmental Quality Objectives
(EQOs) and uniform standards have so far been on the political agenda in the western developed world (Kraemer et al. 2001). However, rigorous but phased legislation with realistic timetables, and enforcement of technical standards can act as key

 
148

P. Nelliyat

catalysts of change in water pollution abatement (Stockholm Water Front 2000). In
developing countries like India, emission-based standards have not been very effective so far, since they are rarely monitored and only occasionally enforced. It is also
incorrect to adopt western water quality objectives that are inappropriate to the level
of development and economic state of the adopting country.
Past experiences has revealed that though India attempted to solve the water pollution issues through legislative and policy measures with huge budgets over a
period of time, significant progress has not been achieved. The overall status of the
quality of water in rivers, lakes and the ground is not satisfactory. The risks of polluted water to the health of humans, and living organisms, and the environment are
critical issues.
A country like India, that possesses 17 % of the world’s population with 4 % of
water resources, extracts its water significantly for various developmental purposes.
Huge quantities of water have been transferred from rivers and the lakes for irrigational, domestic and industrial purposes. Hence, the water flow or storage capacity
of water bodies has declined substantially, and this adversely affects its waste
assimilation/sink functions. There is sufficient evidence to suggest that the problem
of future management of water quality, though complex, is solvable. Surely, it is not
realistic to aim for zero water pollution, but a level of socially acceptable pollution,
respecting the integrity of ecosystems and service provision can be reached. Hence
a rethinking towards a more innovative and suitable approach is needed with an
emphasis on the following strategies.
Policy Advocacy, Governance and Enforcement Precautionary and preventive
approaches instead of end-of-pipe solutions need to be promoted at all decision and
policy levels. Stricter action should be taken to combat corruption in the water sector. Corruption leads to ineffective implementation of water protection policies, and
undermines the efficiency of pollution prevention policies (Kraemer et al. 2001). At
the national and regional level, water pollution prevention policies should be integrated into non-water policies that have implications on water quality such as, agriculture and land use management, trade, industry, energy, and urban development.
It is increasingly recognized that integrated water protection planning is suitable for
the reduction of many forms of water pollution. Considering the negative externality issues; water pollution should be made a punishable offence. The effectiveness
and power of the “polluter pay principle” should be considered. The enforcement
agencies should function impartially and strictly.
Stakeholders Initiatives and Capacity Building In pollution management, the participation of the multi-stakeholders is important. Various policies, plans and strategies to protect water resources should be participatory, allowing for consultation
between government, industry and the public. For effective decision making, it is
necessary to improve the flow of information towards all stakeholders. Often, the
lack of public awareness on the importance of water pollution prevention and low
participation in improvement efforts, contributes to a deterioration of the pollution
problem (World Bank 1998). According to the Commission on Sustainable
Development (2000), there has been an increasing awareness of the need to

 
8

Water Pollution: Extent, Impact, and Abatement

149

strengthen technical and managerial capacity at all levels of the government and
local community. At the local level, capacity building enables the community to
make decisions and disseminate them to the appropriate authorities, thus influencing political processes.
Economic Instruments Recently, the emphasis on policy regarding water pollution
has shifted towards environmental management, using incentives, cost-effective
strategies and improved performance to achieve sustainability (World Bank 1998).
The market-based strategies (charges, environmental taxes, pollution levies and
tradable permit systems) should be enhanced to the utmost possible extent. Higher
charges, fines and penalties act as disincentives to pollution. Besides, it brings revenue to the government that can be used to fight against or abate water pollution.
Further, incentive mechanisms, such as subsidies, soft loans, tax relaxation etc.,
should be included in installing pollution management devices.
Technology Development/Transfer and Input Substitute In industrial pollution
management, technological attempts should be made through Cleaner Production
Technology (CPT) rather than end of the pipe devices like Effluent Treatment
Plants. User friendly and affordable CPT should be developed with the support of
industrial development agencies. Further, sophisticated pollution management technology developed overseas should be brought to India. The application of ecofriendly inputs, such as bio fertilizers and pesticides in agriculture, natural dies in
textile industries etc., will reduce the pollution load discharged into the environment
considerably.
Coordination Among Line Departments A complex issue like water pollution management will succeed only through coordinated efforts from different departments
who are direct and indirect stakeholders in water quality issues. In this regard, the
attempt of the “River Basin Board” at Palar in Tamil Nadu, was appreciable. Right
now, there are multiple agencies involved in river and lake conservation, right from
planning to implementation and monitoring, without proper coordination. Hence
the consolidation of all activities under an umbrella agency is required for better
coordination and accountability.
Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Generally, fresh water sources
(river, lake and aquifer) are Common Pool Resources in nature, and are experiencing the ‘free rider’ problem. Unfortunately, the collective efforts on water bodies’
management are not effective, particularly in urban areas, and are experiencing the
phenomenon of the ‘tragedy of the commons’. Water quality and quantity are interlinked. The polluted water is an ‘externality’ issue, and its environmental and social
impacts are far-reaching. In this context, pollution management should be part of
IWRM, and should safeguard the interests of different water users. At present,
waste water treatment plants generate huge quantities of sludge, which becomes a
threat to the environment and fresh water sources. Therefore, the safe disposal of
sludge is a pre-requisite for maintaining the water quality. Since fresh water is
increasingly getting scarce the application/use of treated waste water for appropriate use is an effective waste management strategy. For example, the waste water

 
150

P. Nelliyat

generated in urban areas can be used for peri-urban agriculture and industry, after
the required treatment.
In brief, in a rapidly developing countries like India, which possess more population and limited water resources, allocation and management of water for various
developmental activities and preservation of biodiversity and ecosystem are huge
challenges. In these circumstances, threat of pollution to the fresh water sources
aggravate the problem and become an add-on challenge. Sometimes polluted river
is more problematic than a river without water. When the public awareness on pollution and its impacts are limited, the cost of pollution on human health and ecosystem is huge. The victims of pollution are generally, the poor or socially vulnerable
communities who are having limited coping strategy against pollution. Considering
the above issues, the effective pollution management strategies need to be implemented with multi-stakeholders initiatives.

References
Ahmed, S. (1990). Cleaning the river Ganga: Rhetoric and reality. Ambio, Vol. 19, No. 1: 42–45.
Alley, K. D. (1994). Ganga and Gandagi, interpretations of pollution and waste in Benaras.
Ethnology, 33(2), 127–145.
Brandon, C., & Hommann, K. (1995). The cost of inaction: Valuing the economy-wide cost of
environmental degradation in India. Discussion Paper. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
CGWB. (2010). Ground water quality in shallow aquifers of India. Faridabad: Central Ground
Water Board, Government of India.
Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority (CMDA). (2007). Draft master plan II for Chennai
metropolitan area. Chennai: Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority.
Commission on Sustainable Development. (2000). Progress made in providing save water supply
and sanitation for all during the 1990s. New York: United Nations.
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG). (2011). Performance audit of water pollution in
India. New Delhi: Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
CPCB. (2006). Performance status of common effluent treatment plants in India. New Delhi:
Central Pollution Control Board, Government of India.
CPCB. (2007). Status of groundwater quality in India: Part – I (Groundwater quality series,
GWQS/09/2006-2007). New Delhi: Central Pollution Control Board, Government of India.
Divan, S. (1995). Cleaning the Ganga. Economic and Political Weekly, 30, 1557–1558.
Elrich, D. S. (2013). Present state of the coastal environment in India. National Institute of
Oceanography. Available online: http://www.teriin.org/teri-wr/coastin/papers/paper2.htm
ERI. (2011). National Ganga River Basin Authority: Environmental and social management
framework. New York: Energy and Resources Institute.
European Commission. (2000). Towards sustainable water resources management: A strategic
approach. Available online: http://europa.eu.int/comm/development/publicat/water/en/
frontpage_en.htm
Gupt, Y. (2003). Polluting units sustainable alternatives to relocation. Economic and Political
Weekly, 38(27), 2812–2814.
Khurana, I., & Romit, S. (2008). Drinking water quality in rural India: Issues and approach.
Background Paper, Conference on ‘Safe Drinking Water in Rural Areas: Community Based
Approaches’ April 8–10, 2008. New Delhi: Water Aid India.
Kraemer, R. A., Keya, C., & Eleftheria, K. (2001). Protecting water resources: Pollution prevention. Thematic Background Paper, International Conference on Freshwater, Bonn.

 
8

Water Pollution: Extent, Impact, and Abatement

151

Lundqvist, J., Appasamy, P., & Nelliyat, P. (2003). Dimensions and approaches for third world city
water security. Philosophical Transitions of the Royal Society of London B, 358, 1985–1996.
Maiti, S., & Agrawal, P. K. (2005). Environmental degradation in the context of growing urbanization: The focus on metropolitan cities of India. Journal of Human Ecology, 17(4), 277–287.
Manson, C. (2002). Biology of fresh water pollution (4th ed.). Harlow: Prentice Hall.
MoEF. (2004). Ganga action plan; Sixty second report – Public Accounts Committee (2003–2004)
for Thirteenth Lok Sabha. New Delhi: Ministry of Environment and Forests.
MoEF. (2012a). National river conservation plan-highlight of the work undertaken. Ministry of
Environment and Forests. http://moef.nic.in/modules/recent-initiatives/NRCD/table.htm.
Accessed 30 July 2012.
MoEF. (2012b). National lake conservation plan. Ministry of Environment and Forests. http://
moef.nic.in/modules/recent-initiatives/nlcp/index.html. Accessed 30 July 2012.
MoWR. (2002). National water policy – 2002. New Delhi: Ministry of Water Resources,
Government of India.
MoWR. (2012). Draft national water policy – 2012. New Delhi: Ministry of Water Resources,
Government of India.
Nelliyat, P. (2011). Industrial water pollution and health implications: Emerging issues from Tiruppur,
Textile Town of South India. In A. Prakash, V.S. Saravanan & J. Chourey (Eds.), Interlacing water
and human health case studies from South Asia. New Delhi: Sage Publications India.
Nelliyat, P. (2012). Valuation of ecosystem damages: A case study of textile pollution in Noyyal
River Basin, South India. In E. R. N. Gunawardena, B. Gopal & H. Kotagama (Eds.), Ecosystems
and integrated water resources management in South Asia. London: Routledge India.
Nelliyat, P., & Ambujam, N. K. (2011). Need for integrated water and land resources management
approach for sustainable ecosystem and water security in third world cities (pp. 34–35).
Abstract Volume World Water Week – 2011 Stockholm (21–27 Aug). Stockholm: Stockholm
International Water Institute.
Nelliyat, P., Ambujam, N. K., & Karunakaran, K. (2009). Environmental challenges and freshwater security in Coastal Tamil Nadu, India. Abstract Volume World Water Week – 2009
Stockholm (16–22 Aug). Stockholm: Stockholm International Water Institute.
Nelliyat, P., Ambujam, N. K., & Karunakaran, K. (2012). An innovative and sustainable approach
towards urban sanitation: A study on a suburban municipality of Chennai. National Conference
on Cost Effective and Sustainable Sanitation – An Indian experience, Organized by WASH
Institute and Department of Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation GoI (28–30 June 2012),
New Delhi.
Palanisamy, S., Neelamani, S., Yu-Hwan Ahn, Philip, L., & Gi-Hoon Hong. (2006). Assessment of
the levels of coastal marine pollution of Chennai city, Southern India. Water Resource Manage.
doi:10.1007/s11269-006-9075-6. Springer Science + Business Media B.V.
Sankar, U. (1998). Laws and institutions relating to environmental protection in India. Unpublished
Paper, Madras School of Economics, Chennai.
Stockholm Water Front. (2000). Water security for a world under rapid change: Overall conclusions from the 2000 Stockholm Water Symposium, Stockholm Water Front, 4, 12/2000, 2–4.
Vinod, T. (2011). SWOT analysis of Ganga action plan. Report Code: 006_GBP_IIT_GEN_
ANL_01_Ver 1_Dec 2011. Kanpur: Development of GRBMP, IIT.
World Bank. (1998). Pollution prevention and abatement handbook. Available online: www.
worldbank.org
World Health Organization (WHO). (2003). Basic needs and the right to health (Chapter-5) (Water
a shared responsibility: The United Nations world development report). New York: United
Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and Berghahn Books.
Yadav, K. P. S. (2002). The small big pollute. Down Earth, 10, 22–34.

 
Chapter 9

Regulatory Instruments and Demand
Management of Water: Potential
and Prospects
V. Ratna Reddy

Abstract This paper is an attempt to review the role of various regulatory instruments in managing water demand with specific objectives of listing out types of
regulatory instruments; role of these instruments in managing water demand and
attaining equity; assess existing social regulation models and draw lessons for policy. Basic regulatory instruments that are being or could be adopted in water management are broadly grouped under: (i) direct and indirect regulation, (ii) economic
regulation, and (iii) social regulation.
The review of the role of regulatory instruments in managing water demand
across the countries suggests that the commonly used instruments like pricing, supply regulation, direct and indirect policy regulation, etc., have not been effective.
This is more so in India due to complex socioeconomic and resource systems and
policy environment. Often policies are neither comprehensive nor they work in tandem. It is argued that unless policy, economic and institutional regulations complement each other, the scope for achieving sustainable and efficient water management
is a far cry.
None of the regulatory instruments have equity in-built in to them. Whatever
equity impacts evident seems to be rather incidental. On the other hand, social regulation appears to be more effective in achieving sustainability and equity though it
requires lot of efforts working through complex rural dynamics at various levels.
The reason is that appropriate policies to support or encourage such initiatives are
not in place. Social regulation initiatives may remain as models rather than being
adapted at a wider scale in the absence of complementary policy/legislative/legal
support. Creating demand for these initiatives is as important as demand management of water. The regulatory instruments for demand management would not be
effective as long as policy environment continues to be supply sided.

V.R. Reddy (*)
Livelihoods and Natural Resource Management Institute,
Door No. 13-6-436/A/5, 3rd Floor, Plot No. 20, Lakshminagar,
Mehadipatnam, Hyderabad 500 028, India
e-mail: vratnareddy@lnrmi.ac.in
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
V. Narain, A. Narayanamoorthy (eds.), Indian Water Policy
at the Crossroads: Resources, Technology and Reforms,
Global Issues in Water Policy 16, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-25184-4_9

153

 
154

V.R. Reddy

Keywords Demand management • Regulatory instruments • Groundwater •
Markets • Social regulation • Equity • India

9.1

Introduction

Judicious management of water resources is among the critical policy issues across
the continents. The need for action in this direction is growing, as countries and
communities across the globe are increasingly experiencing water stress in various
contexts. Water stress often leads to civil strife and conflict. The conflicts could be
traced from micro level to global level (Reddy et al. 2005). These conflicts are
expected to be more frequent in future due to the increasing pressure on the resource
consequent to anthropogenic as well as climate change factors. Increasing intersectoral competition between agriculture and other users (i.e., drinking water, agriculture, industry) and intra-sectoral competition, especially in the case of irrigation,
is adding to the complexity of managing both surface and groundwater resources.
These conflicts represent culmination of gross neglect and miss-management of
water resources over the years. For, the problem is not due to absolute shortage of
water, but due to the absence of proper mechanisms for conservation, distribution
and efficient use.
In spite of rapidly increasing value for water resources, water policies continue
to be supply sided. Water demand management is often ignored in the major policy
formulations. In most cases the projections of water demand are in terms of crop/
human/livestock water requirements that are fixed normatively in a given environmental, socioeconomic and technological conditions. Therefore, the impact of
demand management approaches on the use of water is not properly evaluated. Such
an approach provides a basis for evaluating whether specific investments in water
management are justified (Thompson and Young 1973). The literature on water
demand management indicates that water demand could be managed using regulatory instruments at various levels. However, different regulatory instruments operate and their effectiveness varies across locations depending on the economic and
socio-cultural conditions. These instruments are often enmeshed or integrated in to
institutional arrangements and policy initiatives. Besides, the political economy factors play an equally important role in adopting regulatory instruments.
This paper is an attempt to review the role of various regulatory instruments in
managing water demand. Specific objectives include:
(i) To list out types of regulatory instruments
(ii) Assess the role of these instruments in managing water demand and attaining
equity in access
(iii) Assess existing case studies and draw lessons for policy
Irrigation water management assumes paramount importance in the situation
marked by water stress and in the agrarian economies like India. In these economies

 
9 Regulatory Instruments and Demand Management of Water: Potential and Prospects

155

irrigation consumes more than 70 % of the water utilised and continues to face
shortages in terms of quality as well as quantity. Drinking water sector, on the other
hand, is the socially most sensitive area and needs utmost attention. Within these
two sectors groundwater management is the most important policy challenge given
the fact that groundwater is the single largest as well as ill managed source in terms
of equity and sustainability. This review covers the experience of regulatory instruments in managing water in the context of irrigation and drinking water with a focus
on groundwater.

9.2

Regulatory Instruments: Types and Nature

Lack of clarity in property rights on water requires implementation of sanctioning
and enforcement of water allocation mechanisms at the policy level. Rigid and static
governance structures fail the policy makers to understand the changing water scenario. Lack of information at appropriate scale is a bottleneck at the community
level for adopting informed water management practices (Reddy 2012). The absence
of appropriate information coupled with high economic value is making access to
water a highly sensitive issue. Therefore, it is necessary to manage water in a sustainable and equitable manner. In the light of supply constraints or limited options,
demand management or regulation assumes importance at different levels (national,
state and community levels). Based on a review of existing literature the basic regulatory instruments that are being or could be adopted in water management are
broadly grouped under: (i) direct and indirect regulation, (ii) economic regulation,
and (iii) social regulation. These three groups in a way are overlapping and all of
them even come under policy regulation. For, pricing is done at the policy level and
most of the institutions are also initiated through policy, except some local or informal institutions. However, this grouping is for convenience and clarity. In what
follows we briefly discuss these instruments.

9.2.1

Direct and Indirect Regulation

Water management in India falls within the jurisdiction of the state government that
is responsible for the financing, cost recovery and management of all water resources
(Saleth 2005). However, Central Government has the concurrent power to make
laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of India. Policies or
policy guidelines are often made at the central level and enforced or implemented at
the state level. States also make policies on their own and implement. Direct and
indirect regulation is the most commonly used instrument for regulating water
demand, especially groundwater use. Direct regulations include restrictions on timing of water supply, quantum of water supply, digging new wells, well depths, etc.,
which are generally enforced by the administrative process (Shah 2009). Indirect

 
156

V.R. Reddy

regulations include restricted supply of electricity for pumping, restrictions on
financing, cropping restrictions, price and procurement policies, technology policy,
etc. These regulations consist of complex and multilayer framework of a range of
constitutional and statutory provisions at the central and state levels.
In India water rights are based on riparian law that gives right to water based on
proximity. Communities close to the water sources (rivers) have the first right. In the
case of groundwater the Indian Easements Act of 1882, which mentions about the
private property rights over groundwater use, forms the basis for groundwater regulation in India (Saleth 2005). Adopted from the English Common Law, which gives
every owner of land “the right … to collect and dispose within his own limits of all
water under the land, which does not pass in a defined channel” (World Bank 2010).
Thus, groundwater is treated as an appendage to land because it is an easement connected to land and person who owns the land owns groundwater beneath the land.
They have also the right to transfer the rights over groundwater with transferring the
ownership of land. Given the high inequalities in the land ownership and skewed in
favour of large farmers (i.e., 15 % of the households own 80 % of the land), access
to groundwater is not only iniquitous but also used inefficiently resulting in unsustainable exploitation of the resource.

9.2.1.1

Surface Water

In the case of surface irrigation regulations are introduced through institutional
arrangements like water user organisations (WUAs). These organisations enforce
regulations with policy support. The regulatory instruments in the case of surface
water systems include: crop restricts, water charges, timing the release of water, etc.
In most of the countries, majority transfer units are subsections of main irrigation
systems that are managed by farmer organizations while the main system continues
to be managed by a government authority. Most of these transfer units in developed
countries tend to be water users’ associations that take over O & M responsibility
directly. However, in some of the countries such as in some parts of India, USA,
Mexico, Japan, and Taiwan, the farmer-elected bodies handle large-scale posttransfer governance. These countries have stronger legal systems and local institutions that are more capable of handling management at large scales of complexity.
But most parts of Asia and Africa often lack legal powers of rights and ability to
enforce rules. Most of the cases involve only partial transfer of control over irrigation O & M, especially for larger systems. The evidence indicates that regulations
are used to achieve: (i) efficient water delivery services to suit the local needs, (ii)
increase in the area irrigated and productivity, (iii) reduced financial burden on the
State, and (iv) reduction in the adverse environmental effects.
Recognizing the importance of users in management to solve the main problems
faced by the government in managing the irrigation systems, some States in India
adopted participatory management policies though the policies differed from State
to State (Reddy et al. 2005). For instance, in Bihar, the two tier WUAs exists at village and distributary channel. Entire O & M responsibilities are vested with the

 
9 Regulatory Instruments and Demand Management of Water: Potential and Prospects

157

distributary channels and below to these WUAs. The associations are authorized to
collect irrigation fees and in return they can keep 70 % of the collected amount. In
Haryana, legal and government irrigation arrangements are based on precedents set
by the Moghul emperors and by the British government and the basic irrigation
management system is warabandi or rotational irrigation. The State is considering a
policy to create WUAs at outlet level and assign full O & M responsibilities below
the outlet, including maintenance of lined water courses. It is also contemplated that
the WUAs collect irrigation fees in return for keeping a small commission. However,
the devolution of these powers are yet to be transferred.
Gujarat has a reputation for innovation in irrigation management based on a
number of well-publicized experiments since 1978. However, only in 1995 the State
declared a policy of management transfer. It stipulates creation of WUAs for a block
of 500-ha and transfer full O & M responsibilities for minor and smaller channels
within the blocks to the WUAs. WUAs have to pay the price for water on the basis
of the volume of water actually taken. The State is also planning to invite NGOs to
carry out the work of creation of WUAs in cooperation with the personnel of Water
Resource Department. The policy made provision for incentives, including channel
repairs, rebates for prompt payment of irrigation fees, and maintenance grants
Gujarat Water Users Participation Management Act, 2007 was recent when compared to Andhra Pradesh. The experience shows that these formal PIM initiatives
suffer from legal and legislative support, financial sustainability; water scarcity, etc
(GoI n.d.). Even the earlier experience in Gujarat indicated that generating funds for
covering 100 % 100 O & M continues to be a major challenge (Parthasarathy 2000).
Maharashtra has the long history of development and management of private
irrigation schemes. The irrigation department manages the State’s canal systems and
the basic irrigation management approach is called shejpali although alternatives
exist. It adopted a policy to create WUAs at minor canal level (with average command of 500 ha); transfer O & M responsibilities for the minor and smaller channels
to the WUAs; allocate water to the WUAs through 5-year agreements and charge
WUAs for water on the basis of the volume actually taken (Volumetric pricing). This
new system will replace shejpali. Like Gujarat, Maharashtra also envisaged incentives for farmers. In Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Orissa the present transfer of irrigation
management to WUAs are creating a three-tier system of management organization
including WUAs at the outlet and 500 ha command levels and a joint management
committee (including representatives of the WUAs and of key government agencies) at project level, and transferring O & M responsibilities fully or partially to
these bodies. It is observed that the Maharashtra experience is very similar to Gujarat
as far as O&M recovery is concerned and devolution of powers (GoI n.d.).
In Andhra Pradesh, Irrigation and Command Area Development (CAD) Act that
was enacted in the year 1984 imposed the creation of command area development
authorities and ‘Pipe Committees’. These ‘Pipe Committees’ proved to be quite
ineffective as the delivery of water at the outlet was quite unrealistic leaving no
scope to the pipe committees to effect any improvement in the distribution of water.
The Pipe Committees had no role in the maintenance and their responsibilities were
not defined and hence were non-functional (Joshi 1997). The State through another

 
158

V.R. Reddy

act in the year 1997 called “The Andhra Pradesh Farmers’ Management of
Irrigation” created a three-tier WUAs system at hydraulic level, Distributary
Committee and Project Committee. More than 10,000 WUAs have been created
with a clearly specified responsibilities and powers. A provision was also made to
provide financial assistance for those WUAs that enhance water fee collections in
their commands (Brewer et al. 1999). Though Andhra Pradesh experiment has been
lauded as pioneering in participatory irrigation, the reform process has not been
taken to its logical conclusion. Devolution of powers to the WUAs is very partial
and financial sustainability and covering O& M costs remain major issues (Reddy
and Reddy 2005; GoI 2007a).

9.2.1.2

Groundwater

Direct and indirect regulation is more prominent in the case of groundwater as it
does not involve communities or collectives. This include regulations on number
and depth of the wells, distance between the wells, regulating supply of electricity,
pricing of electricity or diesel, etc. India introduced a Model Groundwater Bill during 1972 constituting a groundwater management agency at the state level, which is
responsible for registrations and control of larger groundwater users. Some of the
major elements of this bill include power to notify areas for control and regulation
of groundwater development, grant of permission to extract and use water in the
notified areas, registration of existing users in the notified areas, prohibition of carrying on sinking wells, etc. The Model Groundwater (Control and Regulation) Bill
of 1992 proposes a kind of groundwater permits systems. However, it did not set
any withdrawal limits (GoI 1992) and confined only in the states of Tamil Nadu,
Maharashtra, and Karnataka. National Water Policy of 2002 also makes certain provisions on control of groundwater extraction.
During the late 1990s states like Andhra Pradesh, Tamilnadu, and Maharashtra
have enacted groundwater legislations. These legislations imposed restrictions on
groundwater exploitation by making registration of wells as well as rigging technologies mandatory. The implementation and enforcement of these legislations are
yet to bear fruits due to various reasons. For, these legislations have failed to take
special distribution of the resource in to account by putting all the regions irrespective of their level of groundwater development. Similarly socioeconomic equity is
not taken in to account while enforcing the regulations i.e., treating those having
and not having wells equally. Due to the negligence and conflict of interests of all
sections of the society enforcement has received scant attention (Sharma 1995).
Similarly, monitoring mechanism to ensure a particular regulation is enforced is a
costly and difficult task in vast and remote regions (Kumar 2007). Given the size,
spread and variety of groundwater extraction across the country it would be a big
challenge to bring groundwater under a formal system of control or sanctions. The
sheer size and anarchy prevailing in this regard is main bottleneck for enforcing
sanctions (Shah 2009).
Limiting power supply and formal credit are the indirect ways of regulating
groundwater use. A number of states in India follow power supply regulations for

 
9 Regulatory Instruments and Demand Management of Water: Potential and Prospects

159

one reason or another. The main reason, often made explicit, for restricted power
supply is supply constraint as well as reducing the burden on exchequer due to subsidised or free power supplied to farm sector. The externality of restricted power
supply is regulation of groundwater use. In fact, farmers express that ‘but for the
limited power supply their bore wells would have gone dry’, especially during
drought years. The power supply restricts are usually associated with subsidies or
free power. Gujarat Electricity Board does not provide new electricity connection
for extraction of groundwater in over-exploited, critical and saline areas without
consent of the CGWA. It has also launched Jyoti Gram Service (JGS) which put
separate feeder provisions for agriculture and domestic services (Lakhina 2007).
There is only 8 h/day power supply to agricultural purposes. As a result farmers are
alerted every time and optimized utilization of water pumped out which reduced
over-exploitation and ensure investment in demand side water management measure. Andhra Pradesh has been using 7–9 h a day power supply along with free
power policy over the last 7 years.
National Bank for Rural Development (NABARD) has adopted a policy not to
provide refinance wells in critical and over exploited areas. NABARD has prescribed spacing norms for different types of areas whereby minimum distance
between two groundwater obstruction structures can be indicated (IRM&ED 2008).
According NABARD regulation, farmers do not get credit for a new bore well if it
is located within 200 m radius of an existing well. These restrictions are also
imposed by other nationalized banks. However, implementation or enforcement of
such regulations have their own limitations as formal credit accounts for minor
share in the investment in groundwater development.
The Punjab Government has recently introduced the Punjab Preservation of SubSoil Water Ordinance 2008, which prohibits the planting of paddy by the farmers in
the state before June 10th to conserve groundwater. The ordinance provides for the
government agencies to plough the area with the standing crop of such farmers who
transplant paddy before the notified date. The effectiveness of this order in dissuading farmers to sow early paddy and thereby conserve groundwater is, however, yet
to be seen.

9.2.1.3

Technology

Technologies are often given little importance in the demand side management of
water. Managing water demand through promotion/discouraging technology is a
less explored option. This is mainly because of the reason that the area covered
under water saving technologies is negligible. Promotion of micro irrigation is the
most widely used across the countries. Micro irrigation such as sprinkler and drip
irrigation are being promoted through subsidy in order to increase water use efficiencies. In Israel policies are designed to use only these technologies for irrigation.
Of late more and more area in India is being brought under these technologies in
order to tackle the scarcity conditions. These technologies are spreading to more
number of crops instead of limiting to horticultural crops earlier. In Gujarat farmers
use micro irrigation systems on various crops like wheat, bajra, maize, groundnut,

 
160

V.R. Reddy

cotton, castor and vegetables apart from number of horticultural crops while drip
systems are used even on water intensive crops like sugarcane in Maharashtra
(Narayanamoorthy 2003). Though these technologies are subsidised, access to subsidies is limited to few farmers making it expensive for small and marginal farmers.
Community based ownership or funding of these technologies yet to take shape.
Moreover, use of these systems are limited to groundwater as there is no incentive
to use them in canal irrigated regions.
Similarly, water efficient crops or cultivation methods are being promoted in
order to overcome water shortages or water stress. One such example is the System
of Rice Intensification (SRI), which requires less water when compared to the traditional flood irrigation with same productivity per unit of land is notorious for its
high dis-adaptation rates at the farmers level in the absence pricing regulations on
water use. There is a need for exploring innovative regulatory mechanisms in order
to promote water use efficiency.
In the case of domestic water supplies also there are technologies that can reduce
water use to the extent of 50 % (Postel 1985). These include faucets, shower heads,
toilet flushes, etc. Countries like Israel, Italy, USA (California, Michigan and
New York states) have passed laws requiring installation of various water efficient
appliances in new homes, apartments and officer (Postel 1984). Installation of these
technologies in the new constructions is made mandatory for giving permission.
While imposing such regulations at the user level is not only difficult but also
involves high transaction costs, imposing such regulations at the industry level
could be much easier. For instance banning the production of high water intensive
faucets, shower heads, flushes, etc., could be achieved with policy regulation (Reddy
1996). Incentives like tax holidays or tax exemptions could be provided to those
industries or products for improved water use efficiency. Combining such instruments with price instruments could result in faster adoption, as it happened in the
case of fuel efficient four stroke engines of two wheelers in India. Use of such regulatory instruments in the water sector needs to be explored. In our view, these are
some of the low hanging fruits, which need to be picked up.

9.2.2

Economic Regulation

Pricing of water or a complementary input like electricity or diesel, water markets
and tradable water rights are some of the important economic instruments that are
used. While direct pricing of water is used in the case of surface water, other instruments are more common in the case of groundwater management. Economic instruments in India include charges and taxes levied on irrigation water or volume of
water withdrawn such as the 1994 Water Law in China (Wang et al. 2007), Law of
the Nation’s Water in Mexico (Shah et al. 2004; Scott and Shah 2004; Sandoval
2004), and Israel (Feitelson 2006). An example of taxes as an economic instrument
is found in the Chennai city. Municipal water utility is paying farmers to sell bore
well supplies to meet the drinking water demand in the urban areas which created

 
9 Regulatory Instruments and Demand Management of Water: Potential and Prospects

161

incentives for the farmers for moving water to a higher-value use and reduced mismanagement in groundwater allocation. However, it is very difficult to collect and
enforce such a fee in case of large resource users or poor governance environment
(Shah 2009). Pricing as a demand management variable is widely studied in the case
of canal water. For groundwater is rarely priced.

9.2.2.1

Surface Water

Volumetric pricing is expected to be effective in conserving water and improving
water use efficiency. However, volumetric pricing is followed in very few cases. A
broader issue: is volumetric pricing technically feasible in Indian irrigation systems,
as metering of irrigation water has become politically sensitive issue in number of
states. Besides, this is mainly due to high costs associated with fixing water meters
and monitoring them. Even in the few cases where volumetric pricing is adopted,
water is often under priced with little impact on water demand. In other words, as
long as volumetric pricing is not equated with marginal cost pricing, pricing is not
going to be an effective tool of demand management. This is mainly due to the reason that marginal cost based pricing is often found to be politically unacceptable
and also may impose undue burden on the marginal sections of the farming community. In the absence of volumetric pricing water pricing on the basis of acreage is
found to be the easiest way of implementation administratively.

9.2.2.2

Groundwater

Electricity pricing is more commonly followed instrument in India. Electricity has
potential to regulate the use of groundwater. For instance, it is argued in the context
of Western India that electricity pricing enhances groundwater use efficiency
(Kumar 2005). The study estimates the levels of pricing at which demand for electricity and groundwater becomes elastic and shows that pricing is socio-economically
viable. But the main difficulties lying with the price mechanism is that of implementation. There is lack of required administrative resources for metering and monitoring groundwater use and collecting user fees. During the 1970s, Government of
India had faced difficulty of metering about two million wells and thus implemented
flat tariff on electricity used by agriculture. At present the number of wells is over
20 million aggravating administrative difficulties and transaction costs. Besides,
pricing is a politically sensitive issue, especially when populism has become the
norm (Kemper 2007).
Development of private groundwater market has a long history in rural India
(Pant 2005; Saleth 1994). Even though selling of water was traced out during 1920s,
it was in the 1960’ when systematic information started flowing (Saleth 2005).
Groundwater markets are widespread in Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal (IRM&ED 2008). However, there is no clear cut
statistics about the total area under private groundwater market. Based on his stud-

 
162

V.R. Reddy

ies from Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh, Shah (1993) projected that the area irrigated
under groundwater markets was about 50 % of the total gross irrigated area under
private lift irrigation. Whereas Shankar (1992) mentions that the actual area varies
between 80 % in Gujarat to 60 % in Uttar Pradesh. A Tamil Nadu study shows that
it is not more than 30 % (Janakarajan 1993). Market forms basically with mutual
understanding between two adjacent farmers on sharing of water (Mukherji 2007).
It serves two purposes: promoting efficient use and providing water to poor farmers
who are either unable to afford wells or find it uneconomical to do so (Shah 1989,
1993; IRM&ED 2008). Markets also increase cropping intensity and demand for
agricultural labour, which ultimately benefits the landless and wage labour (Fujita
and Hussain 1995). But, markets ensure neither equity, especially in scarcity conditions, nor source sustainability (Reddy 2010).

9.2.3

Social Regulation

Community management of groundwater is very limited in its spread despite the
fact the community management of irrigation (tank or canal) is very old. This is
mainly due to the private property or open access nature of groundwater resource.
Participatory approach to groundwater management in India is based on the western
United States experience of the management of aquifer by the communities. This
model has also been tried in Spain and Mexico where users are registered and organized into associations with a mandate to manage sustainably (Villarroya and
Aldwell 1998; Sandoval 2004). Thus ‘community management’ implies creation of
self-governing water user organisations who take the responsibility of sustainable
management of aquifers through collective action (Shah 2009). The main objectives
of management process are to focus on demand side management through participatory data collection, analysis and dissemination (GoAP 2007). It can also involve
any mix of instruments including regulation, property rights and pricing (World
Bank 2010).
Pani Panchayat or water council in Maharashtra is one of the first institutions to
promote social regulation initiatives in order to improve access to water, water use
efficiency and equity. Social regulations such as restricts on digging of bore wells,
specified cropping pattern, water distribution, equal access to water to all households, including landless. This was adopted in a number of villages with mixed
results (Deshpande and Reddy 1990). A different type of peoples’ participation was
found in Rajasthan. Villagers decided to stop sinking of bore wells to preserve and
judiciously use the water resources at their disposal. As a result no bore well is
found within the 4 km radius of the village (IRM&ED 2008). In Kerala two community managed groundwater projects were implemented for proper utilization of
water for irrigation. As per the instructions two persons can irrigate their land at a
time. Farmers bear electrical and O&M charges and succeed to achieve financial
and source sustainability.

 
9 Regulatory Instruments and Demand Management of Water: Potential and Prospects

163

Check dam Movement was started in Gujarat where farmers formed village level
local institutions (Gandhi and Sharma 2009). Under this system villagers undertake
planning, finance and construction of a system of check dams in and around the village to collect and store rainwater to recharge the groundwater aquifers and thereby
recharge the dug wells. Expected benefits are increased water table and improved
agricultural income. However, there was no collective action on reducing overextraction. Communities were self interested and every farmer in the community
was free to extract whatever they want rather than focusing on collective targets for
crop diversification or water use reduction.
Of late quite a few initiatives of social regulation are being tried in a number of
states. Some of them are knowledge based and some combine awareness building
with social regulation (GoI 2011). These include: (i) the pioneering and large scale
APFAMGS programme in Andhra Pradesh aimed at involving farmers in hydrological data generation, analysis and decision making, particularly around cropwater budgeting; (ii) social regulation and water management implemented by the
Centre for World Solidarity (CWS) with its partner NGOs in AP; (iii) social regulation in groundwater sharing under the AP Drought Adaptation Initiative (APDAI)
involving WASSAN, in parts of AP; (iv) experiences from Barefoot College,
Tilonia, with a water budgeting tool known as Jal Chitra; (v) efforts by Foundation
for Ecological Security (FES) at taking a micro-watershed unit for water balance
and planning groundwater use along with communities at their sites in Rajasthan,
MP and AP; (vi) experiences of ACWADAM with SPS in Bagli, MP and with the
Pani Panchayats in Maharashtra on knowledge-based, typology-driven aquifermanagement strategies; (vii) training programs and drinking water initiatives by
ACT in Kutch on the back of training local youth as para-professionals for improved
groundwater management; (viii) research on documenting local groundwater
knowledge in Saurashtra and Bihar by INREM Foundation and (ix) the Maharashtra’s
Hivre Bazar model of watershed development and social regulation to manage
water resources.
Community based management programs should be designed with a shared
focus on improving agricultural productivity, income and water conservation. Water
use reductions should not be explicitly sought but realized by aligning efficient
irrigation interventions with farmer incentives for higher profits. GoI (2007a) also
agrees with the fact that community management “should not work well unless it
serves some basic needs of farmers. According to the World Bank (2010) stakeholders” participation in the management process is necessary because it disseminates
understanding of issues that can be the impetus for up-scaling of good practices in
the sustainable use of groundwater. It also improves the self-regulatory capacity,
counteracts corruption and facilitates the coordination of decisions relating to
groundwater, land use and waste management. According to Burke et al. (1999),
socio-economic, political and institutional factors are main determinates, which
incentivise these stakeholders in sustainable groundwater management.

 
164

9.3

V.R. Reddy

Effectiveness of Regulatory Instruments:
Review of Experience

As far as the impact of direct and indirect regulation on water use and efficiency
are concerned, evidence across the globe indicates that quotas are more effective in
regulating demand. Supply regulation though found to be inefficient in the long
run, it happens to be the most preferred option among the administrators. Quotas or
supply regulations arise due to resource shortages. Less water is distributed equally
among all the farmers in the years of water scarcity. During the drought years
between 2001 and 2004 the Krishna delta farmers in Andhra Pradesh were provided
with 40 % less supply of water when compared to normal years. Farmers not only
managed with low supplies of water but also reported 20 % higher yields. This
reveals the extent of water wastage and inefficiencies during normal years. Hence,
quotas lead by shortages are more preferred to volumetric or marginal cost based
pricing.
For instance, in Andhra Pradesh though some benefits from WUA regulations in
terms of increased area under irrigation in canal systems and improved quality of
irrigation is evident, the sustainability of these benefits is rather uncertain in the
absence of efficient institutional structures. Equity in the management and distribution of water is not addressed. No proper incentive (positive and negative) structures
were designed and placed to support rule compliance (Reddy and Reddy 2005). In
Rajasthan, though more than 800 WUAs were constituted and elections were conducted almost 5 years back, the progress is very tardy. So far no devolution of powers has taken place, though the irrigation department appears to be keen in devolving
the powers (Reddy 2010). In Orissa the Government claims that the PIM programme
allows farmers to take decisions regarding distribution and management of water
resources. In reality the programme has created a divide between the large and
small& landless. Landless are not even members of the pani panchayat. The rotation
of canal water use resulted in poor farmers having rabi crop only once in 2 years and
increasing inequity. Consequently, people rebelled against the programme and the
model has collapsed, but not before causing much misery (Das 2006). On the whole,
benefits from regulations through institutional arrangements (WUAs) are mostly
limited to shifting the O&M responsibilities to the farming communities. Effectively,
the impacts in terms of water use efficiencies and financial sustainability are limited. And there is no evidence of improved equity.
In the case of groundwater, a model bill to regulate and control development of
groundwater has been circulated by the Ministry of Water Resources to all the
States/Union Territories (UTs). So far 11 States/UTs Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Tamil
Nadu, Kerala, West Bengal, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh and Union Territories of
Chandigarh, Lakshadweep, Pondicherry, Dadra and Nagar Haveli have enacted and
implemented groundwater legislation. However, the effectiveness of their implementation and enforcement is not known.
It is often the shortage of electricity that prompts supply restrictions and reduced
exploitation of water. Restricted power supply policy was observed to have little

 
9 Regulatory Instruments and Demand Management of Water: Potential and Prospects

165

consequence in the case of large pumps and multiple wells as the effectiveness of
regulations undermines not only the availability of the diesel pump-set option but
also by the presence of a ‘kink’ in the farmers’ power demands (Saleth 2005). As a
result, misuse of power as well as groundwater is wide spread, as farmers leave their
pumps on round the clock. The combined impact of free and limited power supply
on groundwater use needs to be assessed critically.
In the case of credit regulation field research has shown that it was not very
effective due to the availability of other credit avenues (mainly informal sources) at
the village level (Kumar 2007). This is despite the fact that cost of credit is high for
the informal sources. Credit rationing policy of the bank is also trying to curb new
power connection to bore-wells and put restrictions on electric power supply.
Besides, enforcement is also lax due to the pressure on banks to achieve targets.
Some success in reducing groundwater draft through regulatory measures have
reportedly been made in a few water-scarce countries such as Jordan, where a quasi
water policy requires measuring withdrawals from the irrigation wells, enforcement
of pumping quotas and levy of volumetric groundwater fee (World Bank 2000). But,
the situation is more complex in countries such as India where millions of individual private tube well owners, dispersed through the length and breadth of the country with varying groundwater availability and demand conditions, are engaged in
groundwater extraction. Putting into effect such an approach and overseeing its
implementation in a country of the size of India is nearly impossible. For, the number of groundwater structures in India is estimated at about 23–25 million (World
Bank 2010).
Maharashtra has recently developed a groundwater management model which
involves regulation of more than 1.5 million irrigation wells. It includes a levy of
groundwater use and a ban on deep tube wells. The Chinese, with stronger state
commitment to groundwater regulation, with a more elaborate reach and local
authority structures have still found it impossible to regulate groundwater overdraft
in North China Plains (Shah et al. 2004). Nor have the Americans been able to
implement real groundwater demand management with their elaborate structure or
water rights and groundwater districts, nor have Spaniards and Mexicans with their
efforts to promote groundwater user associations.
It is estimated that micro irrigation systems save 48–67 % in terms water and
44–67 % in terms of energy and 29–60 % in terms of labour. Farmers have also
reported low incidence of pest attack, reduced weed growth, improvement in soil
quality and increased yields. As a result net incomes have increased substantially
and farmers are interested in investing on their own without any subsidy. Costbenefit analysis of drip irrigation in Maharashtra revealed high economic viability
for banana, grapes and sugarcane (Narayanamoorthy 1997). The economic viability
seems to hold good even in the case of small-holdings of just 1 ha. Despite the high
economic viability the spread of these technologies is limited due to high initial cost
and lack of awareness. The rationale of subsidies for these technologies is valid not
only for spreading of these technologies but also due to the reason that social returns
are far in excess of private returns accruing to drip investors (Dhawan 2000).
Besides, there is need for strong extension support for better adoption rates. The

 
166

V.R. Reddy

Table 9.1 Impact of pricing on water demand
Country
Israel

Price mechanism
Block rate tariff

Israel
India

Tiered system of pricing
Price induced water scarcity

Spain

Arbitrary pricing

Sri
Lanka
Turkey
Mexico

Arbitrary pricing

France

O&M cost recovery pricing
O&M cost recovery with
tradable bulk water rights to
WUAs
Volumetric pricing at the
WUA level
Full financial cost recovery

Peru
USA

Volumetric Pricing
Volumetric pricing

China

Impacts on water demand
7 % decline in average water use and 1 %
reduction in output
Regulates water demand at margin
Farmers are responsive but water allocation is
not efficient
Differential impacts due to regional, structural
and institutional conditions
Not effective
No improvement
No improvement at the farmer level. But overall
improvement in water use efficiency due to
internal trading
No incentive at the farmer level as the price at the
farm level is based on area
Managers only discourage water use beyond
subscribed amount
Not used to reduce water demand
Quotas were more effective in times of scarcity

Source: Compiled from Molle; Dudu and Chumi (2008) and Johansson (2005)

spread of these technologies is limited despite some state governments like
Rajasthan, AP, etc., are providing up to 90 % subsidy. This could be mainly due to
the absence of comprehensive policies like water pricing, pricing policies, etc.
Pricing of water as a demand management variable is expected to achieve double benefits of reducing demand and improving financial sustainability of the systems. A number of studies across the world has observed limited impact of pricing
on water demand (Table 9.1). But most of the studies are clear in saying that pricing
has the potential to achieve efficient allocation of water, but its effectiveness in the
real world depends on a number of other factors. These include: (a) proper valuation
of water resources (i.e., use value + scarcity value + existence value), (b) institutional mechanisms like water user associations to support implementations of pricing policies, (c) technologies to enhance water productivity and (d) property rights
in water so that water is tradable and reallocated for other productive uses. More
importantly, in most cases optimum or marginal pricing of water is neither determined nor implemented. In the absence of optimal or threshold level pricing, its
impact on demand is limited. The threshold pricing that would influence demand is
often high making it politically sensitive to implement. Evidence in India shows
that water pricing barely covers the O and M expenditure even in the reform states
where prices have been revised, let alone influencing water demand (Reddy 2003,
2010).
In the case of groundwater, water productivity impacts of pricing would be the
highest when water is volumetrically allocated with rationing. An effective power
tariff policy followed by enforcement of volumetric water allocation could address

 
9 Regulatory Instruments and Demand Management of Water: Potential and Prospects

167

the issue of efficiency, sustainability and equity in groundwater use in India (Kumar
2005). Similarly, in the context of Andhra Pradesh, which is the front runner in the
provision of free power along with supply restrictions, it is argued that pricing of
electricity for irrigation is the only option for addressing agrarian distress (Kumar
et al. 2011). However, impact of pricing on groundwater management could vary
depending on the water productivity (Malik n.d.). In the case of diesel pricing it was
found that price rise may not necessarily result in the reduction in groundwater use
(Shah 2007). On the contrary, farmers may apt for high water intensive and high
remunerative crops.
The impact of water markets on groundwater demand is not necessarily negative. Though, markets encourage groundwater use efficiency, they often expand the
area per well due to the incentive to sell water. However, the extent of the impact
again may depend on the water productivity. Groundwater market in Gujarat, for
instance, does not consider the limit of the resources and thus is not sustainable over
the long run (Kemper 2007). Topography and distance between the source and the
field also influences sustainability. In hard rock, deep alluvial or scanty rainfall
areas, development of market sharing results in over-pumping and over-exploitation. On the other hand, Shah (2009) mentions that tradable property ownership
creates incentives for improving productivity and conservation.
Participatory groundwater Management or Social regulation1 appears to be
more effective in influencing water demand though evidence is limited at this stage.
Available empirical studies show that in the years when water availability was low
due to either low rainfall or high groundwater abstraction during the preceding
crop season are now able to achieve a combination of crop diversification and
water-saving irrigation methods through participatory management (World Bank
2010). A similar experience in Gujarat shows that even though power supply has
decreased from 18–20 to 8 h, community participation in groundwater management raised aquifer recharge where farmers are able to cultivate four good seasons
in a row (Shah et al. 2002).
Participatory groundwater management is evolving gradually in India. It essentially involves communities observing groundwater variables and attempting locallevel, groundwater planning and management. This effort is aimed at augmentation,
conservation and improving patterns of groundwater use (Table 9.2). All these initiatives are diverse in terms of their scale (village, aquifer, watershed) and approach
(farmers collecting data, well drillers providing information, hydrogeologists carrying out surveys, local youth being trained to map the geology). They have a common purpose i.e., to drive a knowledge-based, localized management of groundwater
resources that emerges as a consequence of decisions taken at the scale of a village
or micro watershed and decisions based on some degree of scientific understanding
of groundwater resources. Of course, it goes without saying that the involvement of
Government institutions in such initiatives would greatly help in the scaling up of
1

This section draws from an earlier publication Reddy, V. R., Reddy, M. S., & Rout, S. K. (2014).
Groundwater governance: A tale of three participatory models in Andhra Pradesh, India. Water
Alternatives, 7(2), 275–297.

 
Watershed/
Aquifer

FES

ACWADAM in
partnership with
SPS and GGP
(Pani Panchayats)
ACT

Rajasthan,
Madhya Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh
Madhya Pradesh
and Maharashtra

Village

Village/
Watershed

Hivre Bazar GP

Village/
Aquifer

INREM

Source: Government of India (2011)

Bihar and
Saurashtra,
Gujarat
Maharashtra

Kutch, Gujarat

Watershed

Barefoot College

Rajasthan

Village

WASSAN

Andhra Pradesh

Scale
Villages,
spread over
districts
Village

Organisation(s)
APFAMGS

Locations
Andhra Pradesh

Sarpanch (Mr. Popat
Pawar)

Well drillers and
farmers

Barefoot Geologists
(called par workers)

Organization and
University Research
Unit
Hydro-geologists,
Watershed Teams and
Farmers

Farmers

Farmers

Resource person(s)
Farmers

Table 9.2 Community based groundwater management initiatives in India

A program for
training local youth as
geologists
Documenting local
knowledge of people
on hydrogeology
Rainfall based water
budgeting and GP
rules

Farmers map all water
bodies and record
hydrologic variables
Organization carrying
out monitoring
program
NGO and scientists
carrying out
monitoring program

Social regulation;
Farmers record
hydrologic variables

Method
Farmers record
hydrologic variables

Measurement &
participatory tools

Geologic mapping of
saline and freshwater
lenses
Aquifer mapping tool
and fence diagrams

Hydro-geologic
mapping of
watershed

Simple water
modelling tools

Hydrologic
information for
formulating equitable
distribution
A simple tool called
‘Jal Chitra’

Tools used
Simple budgeting
tools in Excel

Aquifer mapping and
delineating water
quality
Lithology and mapping
major geological
features
Rainfall, water levels,
crops

Well Water levels,
rainfall, crop water
usage
Aquifer mapping, flow
dynamics, modelling

Well water levels, crops,
water use for crops

Parameters measured
Water levels, rainfall,
well yield, crops, water
use for crops
Well Water level,
rainfall,

168
V.R. Reddy

 
9 Regulatory Instruments and Demand Management of Water: Potential and Prospects

169

such efforts. They would also help develop legal instruments that compliment such
efforts rather than remain isolated in the form of command-and-control rules that
most legislative instruments are prone to include. A good legal instrument should
provide the protective cover to such initiatives rather than stress on ‘symbolic’
actions like licensing, policing and punishment, all of which fall under the purview
of “command and control” type interventions.
Most of these initiatives are relatively new and need to be assessed for their
effectiveness in terms of resource sustainability and equity. A recent study in AP has
assessed three models of community based groundwater management. These three
models are: (i) The Andhra Pradesh Farmer Managed Irrigation Systems
(APFAMGS) which has its origins in APWELL programme of the groundwater
department, (ii) Social regulation of groundwater by the Centre for World Solidarity
(NGO) and its partners, and (iii) collectivization of bore wells under the Andhra
Pradesh Drought Adaptation Initiatives (APDAI) programme being promoted by
WASSAN with its partner NGOs. These initiatives have different origins and
approaches to participatory groundwater management (Table 9.3). All the three initiatives have been located in the arid and semi-arid districts of Andhra Pradesh,
where the extent of groundwater development is quite high. Two of the models
focus on social regulation, while one model (APFAMGS) does not have any regulations in-built in to it.
The three models assessed here have the common goal and objective of sustainable groundwater management. All the three institutions are lead by NGOs with
support from different agencies including the state government. However, the
approaches followed and implementation modalities are different and can be
grouped under (i) knowledge intensive; and (ii) social regulation. These approaches
have their advantages and disadvantages in terms of achieving their objectives and
sustainability of the initiatives (Table 9.4).

9.3.1

Knowledge Based Approach

APFAMGS initiative is based on the principle of demystifying science through
enhancing the capacities of the communities in terms of improving their skills and
scientific knowledge. The focus is on facilitating or making communities assess the
groundwater potential at the village level and estimate the available water before
each crop season. These estimates are integrated at the hydrological unit level providing the much needed scientific scale for assessing the groundwater. At the same
time, the scale at which observation wells are monitored (village level) is more
appropriate to the communities. For, official groundwater assessment is made based
on the observation wells located at the mandal (more than 30 villages) level and
does not reflect the situation at the village level. Crop water budgets are prepared by
the communities at the village level and suggested cropping pattern for the season
is provided (based on the groundwater availability) to the community. These details
are shared across the villages within the hydrological unit.

 
V.R. Reddy

170
Table 9.3 Participatory groundwater management models in Andhra Pradesh
Model
AP FAMGS (AP
WELL)

SRWM (CWS Partners
Program on
Groundwater Sharing)

APDAI (of CRD,
facilitated by
WASSAN)
Collectivisation of bore
wells:

Description
(a) Dug new bore wells for a group of HHs not having access to
water with clear sharing, groundwater monitoring and water use
efficiency measures
(b) Limited to ‘new- un-exploited’ areas
APWELL has been transformed in to the largest groundwater
awareness programme in the state premised on: (i) communities
monitoring the groundwater status regularly with knowledge and
scientific principles, (ii) sharing the knowledge of various alternate
crop systems and evolve norms for groundwater management (with
facilitation) and this process will lead to less groundwater depletion
and better management
This programme was initiated on a limited scale and based on
regulations:
(i) Community adopts a norm of ‘no new bore wells’,
(ii) increasing system efficiency through the provision of collective
sprinkler irrigation sets; and
(iii) bore well owners will share their water with neighbouring
farmers leading to substantially reducing water-less families in
the village
This initiative followed an ‘area approach’ for groundwater
management where the bore well owners pool their individual bore
wells to provide supplemental/critical irrigation to a larger rain-fed
area (entire block) for survival of rain-fed crops. Community has to
follow the following rules:
(i) no new bore wells for at least 10 years,
(ii) all the land within the specified area (including water-less) will
have a right for supplemental irrigation for kharif rain-fed crops
and
(iii) pipe-line network is provide by the project so that water can be
taken to any part in the block/area

Source: Reddy et al. (2012)

The approach of ‘do-it-yourself’ with relatively better scientific or technical
inputs has clearly improved the awareness of the well owners. The initiative is
highly successful in demystifying science and needs to be considered at the policy
level to promote institutional linkages for generating such information at the village
level. While such an awareness has helped in checking further expansion of groundwater development i.e., new wells, it failed to encourage other conservation practices
like increased investments in recharge structures or equity by sharing the water with
un-irrigated farmers. Though our sample village does not provide any evidence on
the reduction in water intensive crops (paddy), it is achieved in other places (Reddy
2012). The limited impact is mainly due to the reason that neither social regulations
are imposed nor economic incentives are provided to adopt such measures. In fact,
farmers feel that APFAMGS merely plays an advisory role without any incentives
or disincentives to follow the advisories. The result is lot of useful information is

 
9 Regulatory Instruments and Demand Management of Water: Potential and Prospects

171

Table 9.4 Features of the three institutional models
Features
Initiative (funding)

APFAMGS
External (FAO)

Implementation

NGOs (BIRDS)

Years of existence
Groundwater situation
Project scale
Key features
Scale of operation

8
Scarce
Big (650 villages)
Information
Hydrological unit

7
Scarce
Small (19 villages)
Informal regulation
Vicinity of wells
(within a village)

Institutional approach

Influencing
community through
generation of
intensive scientific
information by the
community
All well owners
with focus on
information.
Followed an
extensive approach
NIL

Regulating
community through
awareness and
incentives

Operational modalities

Farmers contribution
Awareness on
groundwater situation
Participation in
management
Practicing of
recommendations
Key to success
Impacts on access to
water
Nature of key impact

Impact on equity
Scalability
Sustainability

SRWM
External (AEI,
Luxembourge)
NGOs
(CWS + Partners)

Small groups of well
owners and dry land
farmers. Followed an
intensive approach

APDAI
State government
(DRD)
Govt. + NGO
(WASSAN + Partners)
(Mahila Samkhyas)
2
Scarce
Small (8 villages)
Formal regulation
Area based on the
wells (within a
village)
Regulating community
through semi-scientific
information based
awareness and
incentives
Larger group of well
owners and dry land
farmers covering
specific location
Focus on incentives
75 %

20 % towards micro
irrigation
High

High

Limited to well
owners
Moderate

High

High

High

Low

Professional
approach
Moderate

Leadership and
incentives
High

Incentives

Reduction in over
exploitation of
groundwater
No
Good
?

Conservation of
water and sharing of
water
Yes
Poor
?

High

Source: Reddy et al. (2012)

Moderate
Conservation and
sharing of water
Yes
Moderate
?

 
172

V.R. Reddy

generated at the appropriate scale helping only the well owning farmers. While the
farmers hither to not having wells are dissuaded from digging new wells (through
information based awareness), there is no incentive for them to support the initiative. In fact, they are not even members of the committee.
Our qualitative research indicated that farmers are very much interested in having
institutional arrangements in the lines of APFAMGS for managing groundwater.
But sustainability of APFAMGS initiative is a big question mark in the absence of
linkages with formal institutions with policy or legislative backing at the movement.2 Moreover, the exit protocol is not clearly defined. In number of villages the
activities of APFAMGS came to stand still during the two years gap (2009–2011)
due to the delay in the extension of the project. One suggestion made by farmers in
this regard is to bring the initiative under the groundwater department’s purview so
that the process would continue in the long run (Reddy et al. 2011).

9.3.2

Social Regulation Approach

The other two models viz., SRWM and APDAI have adopted social regulation to
manage groundwater. Though awareness building and data generation by the village
communities are important components, the process is not so systematic. The most
important aspect of these two models is to bring consensus among the communities
to share water between well owners and others. Incentives like reduced risk of well
failure as no new wells are allowed, subsidies for micro irrigation, provision for
protective irrigation to the dry plots of the well owners, and the irrigation backup
they get in the event of well failure, are put in place. Besides, there is financial
provision for water harvesting structures to increase recharge, laying pipe lines
for water supply to reduce distribution losses and promotion of micro irrigation
(subsidies) in order to enhance water use efficiency.
Social regulation appears to be effective in terms of stopping new bore wells as
well as larger number of households, especially marginal and small, are benefiting
from sharing water with well owners. This not only helped in increasing the cropped
area, but also provided protective irrigation to number of plots during critical periods thus saving the crops. This also resulted in equity in the distribution of water
and overall improvement in welfare. However, there are differences between the
two models of social regulation in terms of their effectiveness. The SRWM appears
to be more effective when compared to APDAI. One reason could be that SRWM is
older, followed an intensive approach and worked with smaller groups of farmers
than APDAI initiative. Though APDAI mostly follows the SRWM approach, it has
adopted a broader (area based) and formal approach involving the department
(Table 9.4). Besides, groundwater management is one of the pilots under APDAI
and hence there are chances of dilution as far as the departmental involvement
is concerned.
2

Though HUNs are registered bodies and can take up activities like input procurement, output
marketing, etc, they are yet to be functional in these activities.

 
9 Regulatory Instruments and Demand Management of Water: Potential and Prospects

173

Despite the formal approach, participation and rule following is limited in the
APDAI case. People indicated that there are no tangible benefits from the initiative
and 50 % of the farmers felt that the institutional arrangements are not feasible
(Reddy et al. 2012). This view is more conspicuous among those sharing wells. This
sceptical nature could be due to the larger contribution (75 %) from the farmers,
which is substantial (total costs are 8–10 thousand per acre). On the other hand, the
approach of peoples’ contribution could provide the much needed ownership and
sustainability.3 It is observed that the formal process of entering an agreement with the
witness of Tahsildar has also discouraged some villages from joining the initiative.
The formal approach of APDAI appears good on paper, as it follows an integrated approach of drought adaptation. The integration also involves various departments like rural development, groundwater, agriculture, etc., but the feasibility of
such integration is doubtful. The approach involves the existing institutions like
Mahila Samakhyas, which provide the assurance of sustenance in the medium run
at least. At the same time there is a danger of acquiring the stamp of a government
programme where people look for freebies rather than regulation and contribution.
On the whole, the social regulation approach seems to work better for sustainable
groundwater management when compared to the knowledge intensive approach.
Water use and sharing through regulation has increased the area under protective
irrigation in an equitable manner. The knowledge intensive approach is not designed
to address equity. In the absence of any regulations, formal or informal, farmers do
not have any incentive to follow good practices in the given policy environment.
Encouraging sharing of water between well owners and others would result in
achieving double objectives of conservation and improved access with equity. How
to attain this on scale needs serious consideration at the policy level.
Sustainability of these initiatives is a major concern in all the approaches. None
of the approaches have a well defined exit protocol. While the APDAI appears to be
well placed in this regard as its process involves number of departments and formal
institutions. At the same time it requires strong leadership at the village level to
implement and take the initiative forward, especially in the context of peoples’ contribution. In the case of SRWM, its present success is mainly due to the commitment
of NGO partners in the absence of any contribution from the farmers. In the absence
of contribution, financial sustainability of the initiatives would be a big concern,
especially once the external funding stops. The week sustainability of APFAMGS
initiative was already evident during the no fund phase. Fund flows appear to be
critical for the success of the initiatives. The initiatives may continue in some of
the villages due to strong leadership and commitment of local NGOs even beyond
the present funding, as they are at a smaller scale. Scaling up of these initiatives
require much more planning and designing.

3

Of late people’s contribution in the government programmes has lost its importance, as people are
increasing considering government programmes as welfare measures rather than developmental.
And hence contribution is treated as negative rather than ownership.

 
174

9.4

V.R. Reddy

Lessons for Future

The review of the role of regulatory instruments in managing demand for water
across the countries indicate that there is evidence to say that the commonly used
instruments like pricing, supply regulation, direct and indirect policy regulation,
etc., have not been effective. This is more so in India due to complex socioeconomic
and resource systems and environment. Often policies are neither comprehensive
nor they work in tandem. On the contrary they work towards opposite objectives,
viz., water conservation policies like promoting low water intensive crops are made
ineffective through support price policies that encourage water intensive crops like
paddy and free power policies. Unless policy, economic and institutional regulations complement each other, the scope for achieving sustainable and efficient water
management is a far cry. Moreover, none of the regulatory instruments have equity
in-built in to them. Whatever equity impacts evident seems to be rather incidental.
For instance, regulated power supply has checked degradation of groundwater to
some extent, which in turn reduced well failure among small farmers. Similarly,
regulation of water distribution by WUAs has also improved the access to tail end
farmers, who are often small and marginal. At the same time increased inequity is
observed in the context of WUAs in Orissa.
The assessment of three community based models has also clearly indicated that
achieving sustainability and equity objectives is neither simple nor easily forthcoming. It calls for lot of efforts working through complex rural dynamics at various
levels. The reason is that appropriate policies to support or encourage such initiatives are not in place. Often existing policies work towards achieving opposite

 



